Circulation
e334 December 13, 2022  Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Circulation is available at www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry may apply; see Appendix 1 
for detailed information. †SCA representative. ‡ACR representative. §AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards liaison. ||Lay stakeholder representative. 
¶SCAI representative. #AATS representative. **ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Performance Measures liaison. ††AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines liaison. ‡‡STS representative. §§SVS representative. ||||AHA/ACC staff representative.
ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Members, see page e445.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Black JH 3rd, Augoustides JG, Beck AW, Bolen 
MA, Braverman AC, Bray BE, Brown-Zimmerman MM, Chen EP, Collins T J, DeAnda A Jr, Fanola CL, Girardi LN, Hicks CW, Hui DS, Jones WS, Kalahasti V, Kim KM, 
Milewicz DM, Oderich GS, Ogbechie L, Promes SB, Ross EG, Schermerhorn ML, Times SS, Tseng EE, Wang GJ, Woo Y J. 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis 
and management of aortic disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
© 2022 by the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Association, Inc. 
ACC/AHA CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Aortic Disease: A Report of the 
American Heart Association/American College of 
Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines
Developed in collaboration with and endorsed by the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American College of 
 
Radiology, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Surgery
Endorsed by the Society of Interventional Radiology and Society for Vascular Medicine
Writing Committee Members*
 
Eric M. Isselbacher, MD, MSc, FACC, Chair; Ourania Preventza, MD, MBA, Vice Chair;  
James Hamilton Black III, MD, DFSVS, Vice Chair; John G. Augoustides, MD, FAHA†; Adam W. Beck, MD, DFSVS;  
Michael A. Bolen, MD‡; Alan C. Braverman, MD, FACC; Bruce E. Bray, MD, FACC§; Maya M. Brown-Zimmerman, MPH||;  
Edward P. Chen, MD, FAHA; T yrone J. Collins, MD, MSCAI, FACC, FAHA, FSVM¶; Abe DeAnda Jr, MD, FAHA;  
Christina L. Fanola, MD, MSc; Leonard N. Girardi, MD, FAHA#; Caitlin W. Hicks, MD, MS, FSVS**; Dawn S. Hui, MD;  
William Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC††; Vidyasagar Kalahasti, MD, FACC; Karen M. Kim, MD, MS‡‡; Dianna M. Milewicz, MD, PhD; 
Gustavo S. Oderich, MD; Laura Ogbechie, MSN; Susan B. Promes, MD, MBA; Elsie Gyang Ross, MD, MSc;  
Marc L. Schermerhorn, MD, DFSVS§§; Sabrina Singleton Times, DHSc, MPH||||; Elaine E. Tseng, MD, FAHA;  
Grace J. Wang, MD, MSCE; Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA††
              
AIM:  The “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease” provides recommendations 
to guide clinicians in the diagnosis, genetic evaluation and family screening, medical therapy, endovascular and surgical 
treatment, and long-term surveillance of patients with aortic disease across its multiple clinical presentation subsets (ie, 
asymptomatic, stable symptomatic, and acute aortic syndromes).
METHODS:
 A comprehensive literature search was conducted from January 2021 to April 2021, encompassing studies, reviews, 
and other evidence conducted on human subjects that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, CINHL Complete, and other selected databases relevant to this guideline. Additional relevant studies, published 
through June 2022 during the guideline writing process, were also considered by the writing committee, where appropriate.
STRUCTURE:
 Recommendations from previously published AHA/ACC guidelines on thoracic aortic disease, peripheral artery 
disease, and bicuspid aortic valve disease have been updated with new evidence to guide clinicians. In addition, new 
CLINICAL STATEMENTS AND GUIDELINES
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e335
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
recommendations addressing comprehensive care for patients with aortic disease have been developed. There is added 
emphasis on the role of shared decision making, especially in the management of patients with aortic disease both before 
and during pregnancy. The is also an increased emphasis on the importance of institutional interventional volume and 
multidisciplinary aortic team expertise in the care of patients with aortic disease.
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ abdominal aortic aneurysm ◼ aortic dissection ◼ aortitis ◼ aortopathy ◼ bicuspid aortic valve  
◼ blunt traumatic aortic injury ◼ cardiac surgery ◼ guidelines ◼ endovascular aortic repair ◼ heritable thoracic aortic disease  
◼ intramural hematoma ◼ malperfusion syndrome ◼ Marfan syndrome ◼ Loeys-Dietz syndrome ◼ penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer  
◼ thoracic aortic aneurysm ◼ thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm ◼ thoracic endovascular aortic repair ◼ vascular surgery
CONTENTS
Abstract ........................................ e334
Top 10 Take-Home Messages ................... e336
Preamble ...................................... e337
1. Introduction  ................................ e338
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review .... e338
1.2. Organization of the Writing  
Committee ........................... e338
1.3. Document Review and Approval ....... e339
1.4. Scope of the Guideline ............... e339
1.5. Class of Recommendations and  
Level of Evidence .................... e339
1.6. Abbreviations  ........................ e339
2. Normal Anatomy, Abnormal Anatomy, and 
Definitions ................................. e340
2.1. Normal Aortic Anatomy ............... e340
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones ................. e340
2.3. Definitions of Dilation and Aneurysm  
of the Aortic Root and Ascending  
Thoracic Aorta ....................... e341
2.3.1. Normalizing Aortic Root and 
Ascending Aortic Diameters for  
Body Size  .................... e343
2.4. Definitions and Classification of  
Acute Aortic Syndrome (AAS) ......... e345
2.5. Classification of Thoracoabdominal  
Aortic Aneurysm (TAAA) .............. e349
2.6. Classification of Endoleaks. . . . . . . . . . . . e349
3. Imaging and Measurements ................. e349
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine 
Presence and Progression of Aortic  
Disease .............................. e349
3.2. Conventions of Measurements ........ e352
3.2.1. Computed Tomography ........ e353
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging ... e353
3.2.3. Echocardiography ............. e354
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound ....... e354
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound ......... e355
4. Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams ............... e355
5. Shared Decision-Making .................... e357
6. Aneurysms ................................. e358
6.1. Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA)  
Causes .............................. e358
6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative  
TAA .......................... e361
6.1.2. Genetic Aortopathies .......... e361
6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy ............... e373
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and  
Screening ............................ e376
6.3. Growth and Natural History of  
Aortic Aneurysms .................... e377
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic  
and Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm  
Disease .............................. e378
6.4.1. Medical Therapy and Risk  
Factor Modification in  
Sporadic TAA ................. e378
6.4.2. Medical Therapy and Risk  
Factor Modification in AAA .... e380
6.4.3. Surveillance for Medical  
Management ................. e382
6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management  
of Aortic Aneurysms .................. e384
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms  
of the Aortic Root and  
Ascending Aorta .............. e384
6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms ........ e387
6.5.3. Descending TAA .............. e388
6.5.4. Thoracoabdominal Aortic  
Aneurysms ................... e392
6.5.5. Abdominal Aortic  
Aneurysms ................... e396
6.5.6. Surveillance After Aneurysm  
Repair ........................ e401
7 . Acute Aortic Syndromes .................... e403
7 .1. Presentation  ......................... e403
7 .2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, 
Laboratory Testing) ................... e404
7 .3. Medical Management of AAS ......... e405
7 .3.1. Acute Medical Management  
of AAS ....................... e405
7 .3.2. Subsequent Medical Management  
of AAS ....................... e406
7 .4. Surgical and Endovascular Management  
of Acute Aortic Dissection ............ e406
7 .4.1. Acute T ype A Aortic  
Dissection .................... e407
7 .4.2. Management of Acute T ype B  
Aortic Dissection .............. e411
7 .5. Management of IMH  ................. e412
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e336
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7 .6. Management of PAU ................. e414
7 .6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or  
Both ......................... e414
7 .6.2. Isolated PAU .................. e415
7 .6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus 
Endovascular Repair .......... e416
7 .7 . Traumatic Aortic Injury ................ e416
7 .7 .1. Initial Management of Blunt 
Traumatic Thoracic Aortic Injury 
(BTTAI) ....................... e416
7 .7 .2. Initial Management of Blunt 
Traumatic Abdominal Aortic  
Injury (BAAI) .................. e419
7 .7 .3. Long-Term Management and 
Surveillance After Blunt Traumatic 
Aortic Injury (BTAI) ............ e421
7 .8. Long-Term Management and Surveillance 
Imaging After AAS ................... e421
7 .8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging  
After Aortic Dissection and  
IMH .......................... e421
7 .8.2. Long-Term Management After  
Acute Aortic Dissection and  
IMH .......................... e422
7 .8.3. Long-Term Management and 
Surveillance for PAUs ......... e422
8. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy ....... e423
8.1. Counseling and Management of  
Aortic Disease in Pregnancy and  
Postpartum .......................... e423
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With 
Aortopathy ........................... e424
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women  
With Aortic Disease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e425
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: 
Aortic Dissection and Aortic Surgery in 
Pregnancy ........................... e427
9. Other Aortic Conditions ..................... e428
9.1. Inflammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and  
Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) ............. e428
9.2. Infectious Aortitis ..................... e432
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management  
of Infection of the Native  
Aorta  ........................ e432
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of 
Prosthetic Aortic Graft  
Infection ...................... e434
9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease ............... e435
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus .............. e436
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion .............. e436
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta ............... e436
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and 
Congenital Abnormalities of the Arch .. e437
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta ....... e437
9.4.2. Other Arch Abnormalities ...... e438
9.5. Tumors  .............................. e441
10. Physical Activity and Quality of Life .......... e441
11. Cost and Value Considerations .............. e442
12. Evidence Gaps and Future Directions ........ e443
12.1. Biomarker Studies .................... e443
12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors ...... e443
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta ............ e443
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e443
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic 
Disease .............................. e444
12.6. New Endovascular Technology ........ e444
12.7 . Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation 
Protocols ............................ e444
12.8. Equitable Care and Training  
Opportunities  ........................ e444
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e445
Appendix 1
Author Relationships With Industry and Other 
Entities (Relevant) .......................... e478
Appendix 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other 
Entities (Comprehensive) ................... e481
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR 
THE DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF 
AORTIC DISEASE
1. Because outcomes for patients with aortic disease 
are enhanced at programs with higher volumes, 
experienced practitioners, and extensive manage-
ment capabilities, Multidisciplinary Aortic Team 
care is considered in determining the appropriate 
timing of intervention.
2. Shared decision-making involving the patient and 
a multidisciplinary team is highly encouraged to 
determine the optimal medical, endovascular, and 
open surgical therapies. In patients with aortic dis-
ease who are contemplating pregnancy or who 
are pregnant, shared decision-making is especially 
important when considering the cardiovascular 
risks of pregnancy, the diameter thresholds for pro-
phylactic aortic surgery, and the mode of delivery.
3. Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imag-
ing, and echocardiographic imaging of patients 
with aortic disease should follow recommended 
approaches for image acquisition, measurement and 
reporting of relevant aortic dimensions, and the fre-
quency of surveillance before and after intervention.
4. At centers with Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams and 
experienced surgeons, the threshold for surgical 
intervention for sporadic aortic root and ascend-
ing aortic aneurysms has been lowered from 5.5 
cm to 5.0 cm in selected patients, and even lower 
in specific scenarios among patients with heritable 
thoracic aortic aneurysms.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e337
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
5. In patients who are significantly smaller or taller 
than average, surgical thresholds may incorporate 
indexing of the aortic root or ascending aortic diam-
eter to either patient body surface area or height, 
or aortic cross-sectional area to patient height.
6. Rapid aortic root growth or ascending aortic 
aneurysm growth, an indication for intervention, is 
defined as ≥0.5 cm in 1 year or ≥0.3 cm per year in 
2 consecutive years for those with sporadic aneu-
rysms and ≥0.3 cm in 1 year for those with heritable 
thoracic aortic disease or bicuspid aortic valve.
7 . In patients undergoing aortic root replacement 
surgery, valve-sparing aortic root replacement is 
reasonable if the valve is suitable for repair and 
when performed by experienced surgeons in a 
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.
8. Patients with acute type A aortic dissection, if clini-
cally stable, should be considered for transfer to a 
high-volume aortic center to improve survival. The 
operative repair of type A aortic dissection should 
entail at least an open distal anastomosis rather 
than just a simple supracoronary interposition graft.
9. There is an increasing role for thoracic endovascular 
aortic repair in the management of uncomplicated 
type B aortic dissection. Clinical trials of repair of 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms with endografts 
are reporting results that suggest endovascular 
repair is an option for patients with suitable anatomy.
10. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root or 
ascending aorta, or those with aortic dissection, 
screening of first-degree relatives with aortic imag-
ing is recommended.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) 
and American Heart Association (AHA) have translated 
scientific evidence into clinical practice guidelines with 
recommendations to improve cardiovascular health. 
These guidelines, which are based on systematic meth-
ods to evaluate and classify evidence, provide a founda-
tion for the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The 
ACC and AHA sponsor the development and publication 
of clinical practice guidelines without commercial sup-
port, and members volunteer their time to the writing and 
review efforts. Guidelines are official policy of the ACC 
and AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA col-
laborate with other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations 
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing car-
diovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice in 
the United States, but these guidelines are relevant to 
patients throughout the world. Although guidelines may 
be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the intent 
is to improve quality of care and align with patients’ inter-
ests. Guidelines are intended to define practices meeting 
the needs of patients in most, but not all, circumstances 
and should not replace clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommen-
dations, is effective only when followed by both practitio-
ners and patients. Adherence to recommendations can 
be enhanced by shared decision-making between clini-
cians and patients, with patient engagement in selecting 
interventions on the basis of individual values, prefer-
ences, and associated conditions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guide-
lines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, updates, and 
modifies guideline methodology on the basis of published 
standards from organizations, including the Institute of Med-
icine,1,2 and on the basis of internal reevaluation. Similarly, 
presentation and delivery of guidelines are reevaluated and 
modified in response to evolving technologies and other 
factors to optimally facilitate dissemination of information to 
health care professionals at the point of care.
Numerous modifications to the guidelines have been 
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user 
friendliness.” Guidelines are written and presented in a 
modular, “knowledge chunk” format, in which each chunk 
includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis, 
recommendation-specific supportive text and, when 
appropriate, flow diagrams or additional tables. Hyper-
linked references are provided for each modular knowl-
edge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost–value con-
siderations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate and 
feasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-
vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/
AHA methodology.3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain cur-
rent, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis by 
the writing committee and staff. Going forward, targeted 
sections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically 
after publication and timely peer review of potentially 
practice-changing science. The previous designations of 
“full revision” and “focused update” will be phased out. 
For additional information and policies on guideline devel-
opment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guideline 
methodology manual4 and other methodology articles.5-7
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guideline 
writing committee contains requisite content expertise 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e338
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
and is representative of the broader cardiovascular com-
munity by selection of experts across a spectrum of 
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions, 
sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases, 
and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-
sional societies with related interests and expertise are 
invited to participate as partners or collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods 
to ensure that documents are developed without bias 
or improper influence. The complete policy on relation-
ships with industry and other entities (RWI) can be found 
online. Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing com-
mittee members’ relevant RWI. For the purposes of full 
transparency, their comprehensive disclosure information 
is available in a Supplemental Appendix. Comprehensive 
disclosure information for the Joint Committee is also 
available online.
Evidence Review and Evidence Review 
Committees
In developing recommendations, the writing committee 
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on 
all available data. 4,5 Literature searches focus on ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs) but also include reg-
istries, nonrandomized comparative and descriptive 
studies, case series, cohort studies, systematic reviews, 
and expert opinion. Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is com-
missioned when there are ≥ 1 question(s) deemed of 
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic 
review to determine which patients are most likely to ben-
efit from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to what 
degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence review 
committee and formal systematic review include absence 
of a current authoritative systematic review, feasibility of 
defining the benefit and risk in a time frame consistent 
with the writing of a guideline, relevance to a substantial 
number of patients, and likelihood that the findings can 
be translated into actionable recommendations. Evidence 
review committee members may include methodologists, 
epidemiologists, clinicians, and biostatisticians. Recom-
mendations developed by the writing committee on the 
basis of the systematic review are marked “SR”.
Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy
The term guideline-directed medical therapy encom-
passes clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, and both 
pharmacological and procedural treatments. For these 
and all recommended drug treatment regimens, the 
reader should confirm dosage with product insert mate-
rial and evaluate for contraindications and interactions. 
Recommendations are limited to drugs, devices, and 
treatments approved for clinical use in the United States.
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA  
Chair, AHA/ACC Joint Committee on  
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, 
whenever possible, evidence based. An initial exten-
sive evidence review, which included literature derived 
from research involving human subjects, published in 
English, and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), 
EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Health-
care Research and Quality, and other selected data-
bases relevant to this guideline, was conducted from 
February 2021 to April 2021. Search terms included 
both key words and index terms (eg, MeSH, Emtree); 
search terms included but were not limited to the fol-
lowing: aortic occlusion; aortic aneurysm; aortic aneu-
rysm, thoracic; aortic aneurysm, abdominal; surveillance 
after endovascular aneurysm repair; diagnostic imaging; 
monitoring; surveillance; imaging; aorta; aortic; computed 
tomography; ultrasound; magnetic resonance imaging; 
arterial occlusive diseases; aortic diseases; aortic ath-
erosclerosis; atherosclerosis; clinical trial; observational 
study; randomized controlled trial; review; atherosclerotic 
aortic disease; plaque, atherosclerotic; aorta; aortitis; 
infectious; autoimmune; aortic rupture; penetrating aor-
tic ulcers; comparative studies; nonexperimental studies; 
type A aortic dissection; type A; type B; aneurysm, dis-
secting; aorta and echocardiography. The final evidence 
tables are included in the Online Data Supplement and 
summarize the evidence used by the writing committee 
to formulate recommendations. References selected 
and published in the present document are representa-
tive and not all-inclusive.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of clinicians, cardiolo-
gists, internists, interventionalists, surgeons, radiologists, 
anesthesiologists, a nurse practitioner, and a lay/patient 
representative. The writing committee included repre-
sentatives from the ACC, AHA, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, American College of Radiology, 
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons (STS), and Society for Vascular 
Surgery (SVS). Appendix 1 of the present document lists 
writing committee members’ relevant RWI. For the pur-
poses of full transparency, the writing committee mem-
bers’ comprehensive disclosure information is available 
in a Supplemental Appendix.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e339
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
1.3. Document Review and Approval
The Joint Committee appointed a peer review committee 
to review the document. The peer review committee was 
comprised of individuals nominated by ACC, AHA, and 
the collaborating organizations. Reviewers’ RWI informa-
tion was distributed to the writing committee and is pub-
lished in this document (Appendix 2).
This document was approved for publication by the 
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and was 
endorsed by the American Association for Thoracic Sur-
gery, American College of Radiology, Society of Cardio-
vascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, Society of Interventional 
Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, Society for 
Vascular Medicine, and Society for Vascular Surgery.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
In developing the “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease” (2022 
aortic disease guideline), the writing committee reviewed 
previously published guidelines. Table 1 contains a list of 
these publications deemed pertinent to this writing effort 
and is intended for use as a resource, thus obviating the 
need to repeat existing guideline recommendations.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of 
Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the 
strength of recommendation, encompassing the esti-
mated magnitude and certainty of benefit in proportion 
to risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality of 
scientific evidence supporting the intervention on the 
basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data from 
clinical trials and other sources (Table 2).1
1.6. Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
3D 3-dimensional
AAA abdominal aortic aneurysm
AAS acute aortic syndrome
ACEI angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
AHI aortic height index
AR aortic regurgitation
ARB angiotensin receptor blocker
ASCA aberrant subclavian artery
ASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
ASI aortic size index
AVR aortic valve replacement
BAAI blunt traumatic abdominal aortic injury
BAV bicuspid aortic valve
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
BP blood pressure
BSA body surface area
BTAI blunt traumatic aortic injury
BTTAI blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury
CMR cardiac magnetic resonance
CoA coarctation of the aorta
CT computed tomography
CTA computed tomographic angiography
DBP diastolic blood pressure
DMARD disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug
ECG electrocardiogram
EVAR endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair
FID focal intimal disruption
FDA US Food and Drug Administration
FDG-PET fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography
FEVAR fenestrated endovascular aortic repair
GCA giant cell arteritis
HRQOL health-related quality of life
HTAD heritable thoracic aortic disease
ICU intensive care unit
IMH intramural hematoma
IRAD International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LVV large vessel vasculitis
MR magnetic resonance
MRA magnetic resonance angiography
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
nsHTAD nonsyndromic heritable thoracic aortic disease
PAD peripheral artery disease
PAU penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer
PET positron emission tomography
rAAA ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
RCT randomized controlled trial
REBOA resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta
rEVAR endovascular repair for rAAA
SMA superior mesenteric artery
SBP systolic blood pressure
SCI spinal cord injury
TAA thoracic aortic aneurysm
TAAA thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm
TAAD thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection
TAD thoracic aortic disease
TAR total arch replacement
TEE transesophageal echocardiography
TEVAR thoracic endovascular aortic repair
TTE transthoracic echocardiography
VSRR valve-sparing root replacement
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e340
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
2. NORMAL ANATOMY, ABNORMAL 
ANATOMY, AND DEFINITIONS
2.1. Normal Aortic Anatomy
The aorta is the largest artery in the body and can be 
divided into 5 main anatomic segments (Figure 1): the 
root or sinus segment, which extends from the aortic 
valve annulus to the sinotubular junction; the ascend-
ing thoracic aorta, which extends from the sinotubular 
junction to the innominate artery; the aortic arch, which 
extends from the innominate to the left subclavian artery; 
the descending thoracic aorta, which extends from the 
left subclavian artery to the diaphragm; and the abdomi-
nal aorta, which extends from the diaphragm to the level 
of the aortic bifurcation.
The aortic wall is composed of 3 layers (Figure 2): a 
thin inner intima, a thicker central media, and a thin outer 
adventitia. The intima consists of a layer of endothelial 
cells within a matrix of connective tissue. The media 
consists of smooth muscle cells, elastic fibers, collagen 
proteins, and polysaccharides sandwiched in >50 layers 
known as elastic lamellae. The media provides strength 
and distensibility to the aorta, features that are critical to 
circulatory function. The adventitia is composed of con-
nective tissue, fibroblasts, nerves, and the vasa vasorum, 
which perfuse the outer aortic wall and a substantial por-
tion of the media.
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones
In addition to the standard anatomic descriptors of the 
aortic anatomy, there is a more technical classification of 
aortic anatomy that is used to plan, guide, and report aor-
tic interventions, especially endovascular stent-grafting. 
Because the clinical success of thoracic aortic endovas-
cular procedures is influenced by the proximal sealing 
zone, in this system the thoracic and abdominal aorta are 
divided into 11 landing zones, as detailed in Figure 3.
Note that Roselli et al 2 have proposed a modifica-
tion of zone 0, dividing it into 3 subsegments, in which 
0A extends from the annulus to the distal margin of 
the highest coronary, 0B extends above the coronary to 
the distal margin of the right pulmonary artery, and 0C 
extends from the right pulmonary artery to the distal end 
of the origin of the innominate artery.
Table 1. Associated Guidelines
Title Organization
Publication Year 
(Reference)
Guidelines
Thoracic endovascular aortic repair for descending thoracic aortic aneurysms SVS 20211
Valvular heart disease ACC/AHA 20202
Large vessel vasculitis EULAR 20203
Blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA
20194
Congenital heart disease AHA/ACC 20195
Abdominal aortic aneurysm SVS 20186
High blood pressure ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA
20187
Lower extremity peripheral artery diseaseA HA/ACC 20178
Descending thoracic aorta diseases ESVS 20179
Bicuspid aortic valves statement of clariﬁcation ACC/AHA 201610
Vascular graft infections, mycotic aneurysms, and endovascular infections AHA 201611
Endovascular repair of traumatic thoracic aortic injury SVS 201112
Thoracic aortic diseaseA CCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/
SVM
201013
Coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular diseaseA HA/ACC 200614
Acute type A aortic dissection AATS 202115
Type B aortic dissection STS 202216
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Assistants; AATS, American As-
sociation for Thoracic Surgery; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; 
ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; ACR, American College of Radiology; ADA, American Diabetes Association; AGS, American Geriatrics Society; 
AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASA, American Society of Anesthesiologists; ASH, American Society of Hematology; 
ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; ESVS, European Society for Vascular Surgery; EULAR, European League Against Rheumatism; NLA, National 
Lipid Association; NMA, National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; SCA, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; 
SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SIR, Society of Interventional Radiology; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; SVM, Society for 
Vascular Medicine; and SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e341
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
2.3. Definitions of Dilation and Aneurysm of the 
Aortic Root and Ascending Thoracic Aorta
The conventional definition of an arterial aneurysm is any 
artery that is dilated to at least 1.5 times its expected 
normal diameter. 3 This definition applies well to the 
abdominal and descending thoracic aorta. However, it 
has long been recognized that this definition fails when 
it comes to defining aneurysms of the aortic root and 
ascending thoracic aorta. For example, a man in his 40s 
would be expected to have an average aortic root diam-
eter of 3.5 cm; applying the standard definition of ≥1.5 
times reference diameter, his aortic root would have to 
reach 5.25 cm before it would be considered an aneu-
rysm, whereas most experts would consider his aorta to 
be an aneurysm well below that diameter. Indeed, if this 
patient had Marfan syndrome or a familial thoracic aor-
tic aneurysm, aortic repair would be recommended at a 
diameter of ≤5.0 cm, a size that would not even be large 
enough to be termed an “aneurysm.”
The most important consideration in deciding the 
diameter thresholds at which to call the root and ascend-
ing aorta dilated or aneurysmal is based on the natural 
history of such abnormal aortas. Borger et al 4 studied 
201 patients with bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) undergo-
ing aortic valve replacement (AVR) (those undergoing 
concomitant replacement of the ascending aorta were 
excluded) and followed them for 10 to 15 years; they 
found that those with baseline aortic diameters of 4.5 cm 
to 4.9 cm had a significantly increased risk of aneurysm, 
Table 2.  Applying American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to 
Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e342
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
dissection, or sudden death (P<0.001) compared with 
those with diameters <4.5 cm (Figure 4).
To evaluate the risk of type A aortic dissection at various 
diameters below the traditional 5.5 cm threshold for pro-
phylactic aortic repair, Paruchuri et al5 plotted a distribu-
tion curve of ascending aortic size in a community sample 
from the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) 
database. They then analyzed the number of dissections 
(numerator) at each aortic diameter and the population at 
risk at each aortic diameter (denominator). They found that, 
relative to a control aortic diameter of ≤3.4 cm, a diameter 
of 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm conferred an 89-fold increased risk of 
dissection, and a diameter of ≥4.5 cm conferred a 6000-
fold increased risk (Figure 5), albeit these are only relative 
Figure 1. The Anatomy of the Aorta and Its Main Branches.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e343
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
risk estimates and do not inform absolute risk. It follows 
that the increase in risk at 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm justifies defin-
ing an aorta of this size “dilated,” and the abrupt increase 
in risk at a diameter of ≥4.5 cm justifies defining an aorta 
of this size as an “aneurysm.” Using this approach, of the 
subjects in the MESA database, only 2.6% would be con-
sidered to have a dilated aorta and only 0.2% to have an 
aneurysm.
This definition of a dilated ascending aorta being ≥4.0 
cm is consistent with what was proposed in the 2014 
European Society of Cardiology guidelines on the diag-
nosis and treatment of aortic diseases, in which aortic 
“dilation” was similarly defined as an aorta diameter of 
>4.0 cm.6
Finally, in the clinical setting, the term “dilation” is 
preferred to “ectasia” to describe mild aortic enlarge-
ment. Historically, there has been a lack of uniformity in 
the use of “ectasia” in image interpretation. Many radi-
ologists use “ectatic” rather than “dilated” to describe 
a mildly enlarged aorta, whereas others use “ectatic” 
to describe an abnormal aortic shape, such as a “tor-
tuous” aorta. 7 Even more problematic is the fact that 
some imaging groups use the term “ectasia” to describe 
larger aortas, such as those 4.5 cm to 5.4 cm in diam-
eter,8 which overlaps with what most experts would 
consider to be an aneurysm. Lastly, in imaging of the 
coronary arteries, “ectasia” is typically used to describe 
diffuse (rather than focal) coronary artery dilation, 9 
which may lead to some clinical uncertainty when “ecta-
sia” is applied to the aorta.
2.3.1. Normalizing Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic 
Diameters for Body Size
As with the aortic diameter thresholds for surgery pre-
sented in this guideline, it recognized that the 4.0 cm 
and 4.5 cm diameter thresholds discussed previously 
Figure 2. A Simplified Diagram Depicting the Key Histologic 
Components of the Aortic Wall.
The medial layer in human aortas contains >50 alternating layers of 
elastin and smooth muscle cells (whereas only 5 are shown in this 
simplified illustration). Adapted (cropped) from “Illustration of tunics of 
the arteries vs veins” by Malgosia Wilk-Blaszczak, used under CC-BY 
4.0. “Illustration of tunics of the arteries vs veins” is adapted (cropped) 
from figure 20.3 in BC OpenStax Anatomy and Physiology used 
under CC-BY 4.0.
Figure 3. Classification of Aortic Anatomic Segments by 11 
Landing Zones.
Zone 0 (involves the ascending to distal end of the origin of the 
innominate artery); Zone 1 (involves the origin of the left common 
carotid; between the innominate and the left carotid); Zone 2 (involves 
the origin of the left subclavian; between the left carotid and the 
left subclavian); Zone 3 (involves the proximal descending thoracic 
aorta down to the T4 vertebral body; the first 2 cm distal to the left 
subclavian); Zone 4 (the end of zone 3 to the mid-descending aorta – 
T6); Zone 5 (the mid-descending aorta to the celiac); Zone 6 (involves 
the origin of the celiac; the celiac to the superior mesenteric); Zone 
7 (involves the origin of the superior mesenteric artery; the superior 
mesenteric to the renals); Zone 8 (involves the origin of the renal 
arteries; the renal to the infrarenal abdominal aorta); Zone 9 (the 
infrarenal abdominal aorta to the level of aortic bifurcation ); Zone 10 
(the common iliac); Zone 11 (involves the origin of the external iliac 
arteries). From Czerny et al.1 Copyright 2019, with permission from 
Elsevier, Inc., Now Medical Studios, and Oxford University Press on 
behalf of the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e344
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
are intended for those whose height, body surface area 
(BSA), or both is within 1 to 2 standard deviations of the 
mean. For male and female patients who are significantly 
shorter or taller than average, these diameters need to 
be adjusted downward or upward, accordingly. Several 
methods to normalize aortic diameter are currently used 
in clinical practice and clinical research.
The Z-Score
The z-score is routinely used to assess aortic dilation 
in the pediatric population, as changes in a child’s age 
and body size make it especially challenging to define 
normal aortic size and to distinguish normal from patho-
logic aortic growth. Nomograms have been established 
correlating BSA and aortic root diameter to generate 
the z-score. One limitation of the reliance on BSA is that 
there are multiple formulae to calculate BSA that yield 
different results for the same patient. A second limitation 
is that multiple z-score calculators exist, each performing 
differently.10 Finally, most of the literature on the natu-
ral history of acute aortic syndromes (AAS) is based on 
aortic diameters, whereas reports of outcome based on 
z-scores are limited, so the z-score is not typically used to 
report the degree of aortic dilation in adults.
The Aortic Size Index and Aortic Height Index
Most often, in the clinical care of adult patients, aortic 
diameters are normalized using a ratio of aortic diameter 
Figure 4. Freedom From Ascending 
Aortic Complications for Patients 
With Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease.
Patients with moderate dilation of the 
ascending aorta (4.5 cm–4.9 cm) had a 
significantly increased risk of future aortic 
complications (aneurysm, dissection, or 
sudden death). Reprinted from Borger et 
al.4 Copyright 2004, with permission from 
Elsevier, Inc. and the American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery.
Figure 5. Relative Risk of Aortic 
Dissection by Size Range.
The relative risk of aortic dissection begins 
to increase appreciably at a diameter 
of 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm and then increases 
dramatically at a diameter of ≥4.5 cm. 
Reprinted from Paruchuri et al.5 Copyright 
2005, with permission from Karger 
Publishers, Basel‚ Switzerland.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e345
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
to BSA or aortic diameter to the patient’s height. In 2006, 
Davies et al11 showed that aortic size index (ASI), which is 
defined as aortic diameter (cm)/BSA(m2), is a better pre-
dictor of adverse aortic events than diameter alone, and 
that a simple nomogram could be used to stratify those 
with aortic aneurysms into low-, medium-, and high-risk 
groups. However, it is unclear whether the weight of an 
adult has a significant impact on the expected normal 
aortic diameter, and one would not expect a patient’s 
aorta to grow or shrink with significant fluctuations in 
weight. Zafar et al 12 therefore examined whether aortic 
height index (AHI), which is defined as aortic diameter 
(cm)/patient height (m), might perform better than the 
ASI, and they reported that the AHI performed at least as 
well as the ASI12 and had the advantage of being simpler 
to calculate.
The Cross-Sectional Area to Height Ratio
Another approach to normalizing aortic size to height 
was proposed by Svensson et al in 200213 in which they 
calculated a ratio of the cross-sectional area of the aorta 
(cm) to the patient’s height (m). The initial studies used 
a cross-sectional area to height ratio of >10 cm 2/m 
as a threshold for intervention because of a signifi-
cant increase in risk of adverse events; notably, in more 
contemporary reports, this group has shown the sim-
pler cross-sectional area to height ratio of ≥10 cm 2/m 
(rather than >10 cm 2/m) as the threshold predictive of 
increased risk.14,15
2.4. Definitions and Classification of Acute 
Aortic Syndrome (AAS)
AAS are life-threatening conditions in which there is a 
breach in the integrity of the aortic wall. The most com-
mon AAS are aortic dissection, intramural hematoma 
(IMH), and penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU), all of 
which can lead to rupture (Figure 6).
2.4.1. Aortic Dissection
Aortic dissection is the most common of the AAS. Aor-
tic dissection occurs when there is an intimal tear that 
allows the blood to pass through the tear and into the 
aortic media, splitting the intima in 2 longitudinally, cre-
ating a dissection flap that divides the true lumen from 
a newly formed false lumen (Figure 6). The dissection 
flap can propagate in an antegrade or retrograde fashion 
and lead to a number of life-threatening complications, 
including acute aortic regurgitation (AR), myocardial 
ischemia, cardiac tamponade, acute stroke, or malperfu-
sion syndromes. The blood surging in the false lumen 
Figure 6. Acute Aortic Syndromes.
In aortic dissection, a tear in the aortic 
intima allows blood to penetrate the aortic 
media, pushing the dissection flap into 
the middle of the aorta, separating the 
true from the false lumen. In intramural 
hematoma, blood leaks into the aortic 
media at low pressure, forming a thrombus 
that pushes the outer wall of the aorta 
outward, leaving a relatively normal 
appearing aortic lumen. A penetrating 
atherosclerotic ulcer allows blood to 
enter the aortic media, but atherosclerotic 
scarring of the aorta typically confines 
the blood collection, often resulting in a 
localized dissection or pseudoaneurysm. 
Adapted with permission from Springer 
Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: 
Springer Nature, Clough et al‚1 Copyright 
2015.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e346
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
may rupture back through the intima into the true lumen, 
creating a reentry tear. If the blood in the false lumen 
instead tears through the outer media and adventitia, 
aortic rupture will result. The incidence of aortic dissec-
tion is estimated to be 5 to 30 cases per million people 
per year, with men more commonly affected. Most dis-
sections occur in those between the ages of 50 to 70 
years, although patients with Marfan syndrome, BAV, 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and vascular Ehlers-Danlos syn-
drome, present at younger ages.
2.4.1.1. Definition
Aortic dissection has traditionally been defined as 
“acute” during the first 2 weeks after symptom onset and 
“chronic” when beyond the second week. Investigators 
from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissec-
tion (IRAD) proposed that aortic dissection be divided 
into 4 temporal types: hyperacute (<24 h), acute (2–7 
d), subacute (8–30 d), and chronic (>30 d). 2 The most 
contemporary temporal classification system, proposed 
by the SVS and STS, similarly divides aortic dissection 
into 4 temporal types, as shown in Table 3, to improve 
prognostication and guide decision making about the 
timing and types of potential intervention.
Acute aortic dissection of the ascending aorta is highly 
lethal in symptomatic patients left untreated, with an early 
mortality of 1% to 2% per hour after symptom onset.3 The 
mortality rate is increased among patients who present 
with or develop complications of cardiac tamponade (with 
or without cardiogenic shock), acute myocardial ischemia 
or infarction, stroke, or organ malperfusion. 3 Patients 
with uncomplicated acute type B aortic dissection have 
a 30-day mortality rate of 10%. However, when patients 
with acute type B aortic dissection develop complica-
Table 3. Classiﬁcation of Aortic Dissection Chronicity Based 
on the 2020 SVS/STS Reporting Standards
Chronicity Time From Onset of Symptoms
Hyperacute <24 h
Acute 1–14 d
Subacute 15–90 d
Chronic >90 d
Adapted with permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre 
GmbH: Springer Nature, Clough RE, et al.1 Copyright 2015.
STS indicates Society of Thoracic Surgeons; and SVS, Society for Vascular 
Surgery.
Figure 7. Classification of Acute Aortic Dissection.
The DeBakey and Stanford classification systems are used most commonly. The DeBakey system offers greater anatomic detail, whereas the 
Stanford system is simpler, essentially distinguishing those dissections that involve the ascending thoracic aorta from those that do not.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e347
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
tions, such as malperfusion or rupture, the mortality rate 
increases to 20% by day 2 and to 25% by day 30.3
2.4.1.2. Classification
There are 2 commonly used anatomic classification sys-
tems for aortic dissection (Figure 7): the DeBakey sys-
tem and the Stanford system.
The DeBakey system categorizes dissections into 
types I, II, and III, based on the origin of the intimal tear 
and the extent of the dissection:
● T ype I: Dissection tear originates in the ascending 
aorta and propagates distally to include the aortic 
arch and typically the descending aorta
● T ype II: Dissection tear is confined only to the 
ascending aorta
● T ype III: Dissection tear originates in the descend-
ing thoracic aorta and propagates most often 
distally
○ T ype IIIa: Dissection tear is confined only to the 
descending thoracic aorta
○ T ype IIIb: Dissection tear originates in the 
descending thoracic aorta and extends below 
the diaphragm
The Stanford classification system divides dissections 
into 2 categories according to whether the ascending 
aorta is involved or not, regardless of the site of origin:
● T ype A: All dissections involving the ascending 
aorta, irrespective of the site of the intimal tear
● T ype B: All dissections that do not involve the 
ascending aorta (including dissections that involve 
the aortic arch but spare the ascending aorta)
In 2019, the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic 
Surgery and the European Society for Vascular Surgery 
published an expert consensus document4 for the treat-
ment of thoracic arch pathologies, in which they added 
a third category called “non-A-non-B dissection,” to be 
used for patients whose proximal dissection flap begins 
in the aortic arch.Most recently, in 2020, the SVS and the 
STS proposed an entirely new classification scheme that 
defines the aortic dissection anatomy in more granular 
detail5: Dissections are defined anatomically according 
to the location of intimal tears and the proximal and distal 
extent of the dissection process (Figure 8).
AD indicates type A is used for any dissection with an 
entry tear in zone 0 and extends distally the zone denoted 
by the subscript D (eg, A 9); BPD, type B is used for any 
dissection with an entry tear in zone 1 or beyond; the 
proximal and distal extents of the dissection are denoted 
by subscripts P and D, respectively (eg, B 39). ID, when a 
dissection begins in zone 0 but the location of the entry 
tear has not been identified, it will be considered “Inde-
terminate”; it will be designated with an I and its distal 
extent denoted by the subscript D (eg, I9).
2.4.1.3. Malperfusion
Malperfusion syndrome occurs when there is end-organ 
ischemia related to inadequate perfusion of the aortic 
branch vessels. The relationship of the true and false 
lumens in an aortic dissection has a critical role in main-
taining stable perfusion of end-organs. Initially, the true 
lumen collapses because of the loss of transmural pres-
sure across the dissection flap and the subsequent elas-
tic recoil of the medial smooth muscle. Simultaneously, 
the false lumen expands immediately because of reduced 
elastic recoil, depth of the dissection plane within the 
media, and percentage of the wall circumference involved. 
Figure 8. Anatomic Reporting of 
Aortic Dissection Based on the 2020 
SVS/STS Reporting Standards.
STS indicates Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons; and SVS, Society for Vascular 
Surgery. Reprinted from Lombardi et al.5 
Copyright 2020, with permission from 
Elsevier, Inc., the Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, and the Society for Vascular 
Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e348
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Any of the aortic branches are at risk for malperfusion as 
the false lumen expands and compresses the true lumen 
and can occur in multiple vascular beds simultaneously 
as the dissection propagates distally. Dynamic obstruc-
tion occurs when the septum of the dissected intima pro-
lapses across into the ostia of a branch, usually during 
systole, thereby not allowing adequate flow to perfuse 
the vessel (Figure 9). The ostia itself remains anatomi-
cally undamaged. When the dissection tear extends into 
the vessel proper and creates a stenosis or thrombosis in 
the artery, static obstruction occurs (Figure 9).
2.4.2. Intramural Hematoma
IMH describes the presence of blood within the medial 
layer of the aortic wall in the absence of an overt inti-
mal tear or patent false lumen. The blood may arise 
from either rupture of the vasa vasorum causing bleed-
ing within the media 7 or small intimal tears that are not 
visualized on standard imaging examinations. 8 IMH is 
diagnosed by computed tomographic angiography (CTA), 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and echocardiogra-
phy by the presence of a circular or crescent-shaped 
thickening of the aortic wall of >5 mm in the absence of 
detectable blood flow9 (Figure 6). Of patients presenting 
with suspected AAS, studies suggest that 5% to 25% 
have IMH, a proportion that approaches 30% to 40% in 
the Asian literature.8-11
The natural history of IMH is variable. Fewer than 
10% of IMH cases resolve spontaneously, whereas 16% 
to 47% progress to aortic dissection if the intimal layer 
ruptures and creates an entry tear.7 ,12
2.4.3. Penetrating Atherosclerotic Ulcer
A PAU begins with an ulceration of an atherosclerotic 
plaque, which leads to a focal disruption in the aortic 
intima that allows blood to penetrate into the medial 
layer and is often associated with an IMH of variable 
size.10 PAUs most often appear in the middle or distal 
descending thoracic aorta, less frequently in the aortic 
arch and abdominal aorta, and rarely in the ascending 
aorta.8,10 PAUs can vary in size, and often multiple PAUs 
are present.10 The true incidence is unknown but is esti-
mated to account for 2% to 7% of all cases of AAS. 10 
T ypically, patients with PAU are older (>70 years of age) 
than those with classic aortic dissection and present 
more often with extensive and diffuse atherosclerotic 
disease involving both the aorta and coronary arteries. 10 
Additional common comorbidities include hypertension, 
tobacco use, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and 
renal insufficiency. PAU can occur in younger patients 
but often in the setting of a connective tissue disorder, 
and men are more commonly affected than women.8The 
natural history of PAU is not well defined, as they can 
remain stable, enlarge, or progress to either IMH, dis-
section, pseudoaneurysm, or aortic rupture. 8 The risk 
of rupture has been reported to be up to 40%. 13 The 
optimal management strategy must be individualized, 
Figure 9. Mechanisms of Dynamic and Static Obstruction in 
Aortic Dissection.
(A) Static obstruction occurs when the dissection flap extends from the 
aortic lumen into the ostium of the affected branch vessel, leading to 
localized thrombosis of the branch false lumen that narrows or colludes 
the branch true lumen and, consequently, impairs distal branch perfusion. 
(B) Dynamic obstruction occurs when the false lumen becomes 
persistently pressurized and compresses the true lumen, in turn pushing 
the dissection flap up against the ostium of the affected branch vessel, 
significantly reducing or occluding its flow. (C) Sometimes, a branch vessel 
can suffer from both static and dynamic obstruction at the same time. 
Adapted with permission from Grewal et al.6 Copyright 2021, Elsevier, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e349
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
considering the clinical presentation, the imaging fea-
tures of the PAU, and the patient’s comorbidities.
2.5. Classification of Thoracoabdominal Aortic 
Aneurysm (TAAA)
When descending thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) 
extend into the abdominal aorta, they are referred to as 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms (TAAA). The Craw-
ford classification of TAAA, later modified by Safi et al 1 
(Figure 10), not only describes the extent of an aneu-
rysm but also may predict the morbidity and mortality 
associated with aneurysm repair.2
2.6. Classification of Endoleaks
Endovascular stent-grafting is widely used in the repair of 
aortic aneurysms. One of the limitations of endografting is 
the occurrence of endoleaks, either early or late following 
the procedure. There are 5 types of endoleaks, as detailed 
in Figure 11. An endoleak results in the persistence of 
blood flow outside the graft and within the aneurysm 
sac, preventing its complete thrombosis. Consequently, 
patients with endografts require lifelong surveillance imag-
ing to monitor for the appearance of endoleaks.1
3. IMAGING AND MEASUREMENTS
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine 
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease
Recommendations for Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine 
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, aortic diameters should be mea-
sured at reproducible anatomic landmarks 
perpendicular to axis of blood flow, and these 
measurement methods should be reported 
in a clear and consistent manner. In cases of 
asymmetric or oval contour, the longest diam-
eter and its perpendicular diameter should be 
reported.3,4
Figure 10. Classification of Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms.
The classification of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms according to extent of aortic involvement as originally proposed by Crawford is as 
follows3: Extent I, below the left subclavian to above the celiac axis or opposite the superior mesenteric and above the renal arteries; Extent II, 
below the left subclavian and including the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the level of the aortic bifurcation; Extent III, below T6 intercostal space, 
tapering to just above the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the iliac bifurcation; and Extent IV, below T12, tapering to above the iliac bifurcation. Safi 
et al1 proposed expanding the classification with the addition of Extent V, below T6, tapering to just above the renal arteries.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e350
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
1 C-LD
2. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, episodic and cumulative ionizing radi-
ation doses should be kept as low as feasible 
while maintaining diagnostic image quality.5-7
1 C-EO
3. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, when performing CT or MR imaging, 
it is recommended that the root and ascending 
aortic diameters be measured from inner-edge 
to inner-edge, using an electrocardiographic-
synchronized technique. If there are aortic 
wall abnormalities, such as atherosclerosis or 
discrete wall thickening (more common in the 
distal aorta), the outer-edge to outer-edge 
diameter should be reported (Table 4).
1 C-EO
4. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, the aortic root diameter should be 
recorded as maximum sinus to sinus mea-
surement. In the setting of known asymmetry, 
multiple measurements should be reported, 
and both short- and long-axis images of the 
root should be obtained to avoid underestima-
tion of the diameter.
2a C-LD
5. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, it is reasonable that a dilated root or 
ascending aorta be indexed to patient height 
or BSA in the report, to aid in clinical risk 
assessment.8-11
2a C-EO
6. In patients with known or suspected aortic 
disease, when performing echocardiography, 
it is reasonable to measure the aorta from 
leading-edge to leading-edge, perpendicular 
to the axis of blood flow.
2b C-EO
 Using inner-edge to inner-edge measure-
ments may also be considered, particularly on 
short-axis imaging.
Synopsis
Optimized depiction of aortic anatomy and pathology 
requires dedicated aortic imaging protocols. Computed 
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesoph-
ageal echocardiography (TEE), and abdominal aortic 
ultrasound all have important roles in these evaluations 
(Table 5). Selection of an imaging modality may be based 
on patient-specific factors, including hemodynamic sta-
bility, contrast allergy, renal function, and patient toler-
ance (eg, given relatively longer examination times and 
the confined space associated with MRI, occasionally 
requiring sedation). The institutional availability of an 
imaging modality or an expert imaging physician may 
also direct modality selection. The ubiquity of CT scan-
ners, combined with rapid acquisition of intuitive, high-
resolution 3-dimensional (3D) imaging data sets, has led 
to the wide adoption of this modality for the assessment 
of suspected aortic pathology and for periprocedural 
vascular evaluation, in most cases supplanting diagnostic 
catheter angiography.12
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Measurements should be obtained perpendicular 
to the long axis of the aorta at specified segmen-
tal locations (Figure 12), with measurements also 
taken at the locations of any abnormalities. If a 3D 
data set has been acquired, dedicated multiplanar 
reformats orthogonal to aortic flow axis should 
be created at each level of measurement. This 
approach provides structured, repeatable measure-
ment reporting on serial imaging and avoids oblique 
imaging that may overestimate the aortic diameter 
at levels of greater curvature and tortuosity.3,4
2. The cancer risk associated with CT scans remains 
a controversial issue; however, the risk is generally 
agreed to be greatest early in life and substantially 
attenuated later in life.5,6 Consideration of the indi-
cation for aortic imaging, optimization of the tube 
settings for CT protocols, and use of alternative 
modalities such as MRI are all valid approaches to 
mitigate patient radiation exposure.7
3. On CT and MRI, the root diameter can be mea-
sured from the commissure to the opposite sinus, 
or from sinus to sinus, which results in larger 
dimensions (Figure 12). 13 Measuring from sinus 
to sinus and from inner-edge to inner-edge on 
CT and MRI has shown good correlation with TTE 
for measurements of the root and ascending seg-
ments,14 as well as improved confidence in the 
determination of aortic root margins on MRI and 
lower interobserver and intraobserver variability. 15 
Measurement of graft material (eg, interposed 
surgical or  endostent) may likewise include an 
inner-edge to inner-edge measurement for deter-
mination of the functional lumen and potential use 
in extension treatment planning. The use of elec-
trocardiographic-gated images decreases motion 
artifact and improves edge depiction in aortic root 
imaging, with diminished measurement variability.16 
If there are aortic wall changes (eg, atherosclero-
sis, mural thrombus), as is more commonly noted in 
the arch and distal aorta, or discrete wall thicken-
ing (eg, aortitis or IMH), the outer margins of the 
abnormal segments are measured.
4. The shape of the aortic root can be asymmetric, and 
the difference between the minimum (short-axis) 
and maximum (long-axis) root diameters can be sig-
nificant, particularly in those with bicuspid valves.17 
To avoid underestimation, multiple measurements 
should be reported, with either each of the sinus-to-
sinus diameters or both short- and long-axis diam-
eters, to avoid underestimation of the true root size.
5. The cross-sectional aortic area to patient height 
ratio has been shown to be associated with risk 
of aortic dissection and death in patients with tri-
cuspid or bicuspid valves 9,10 (see Section 2.3.1, 
Recommendations for Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine 
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e351
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
“Normalizing Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic 
Diameters for Body Size”), and both ASI and AHI 
have been shown to predict risk of adverse events 
(rupture, dissection, or death).11
6. There is a wealth of historical data regarding using 
TTE to measure the aortic root (at end-diastole) 
from the leading-edge of the anterior wall to the 
leading-edge of the posterior wall, identifying the 
largest diameter.18,19 These data led to the deter-
mination of normal limits adjusted for age, sex, and 
body size20 and provided insight regarding the prev-
alence and prognostic importance of aortic dilation. 
Additionally, measuring from leading-edge to lead-
ing-edge on TTE has shown good correlation with 
inner-edge to inner-edge measurements obtained 
on CT and MRI. 14 The method of inner-edge to 
Figure 11. Classification of Endoleak Types.
Endoleaks are classified by 5 types: Type Ia, proximal attachment site endoleak; Type Ib, distal attachment site endoleak; Type II, backfilling 
of the aneurysm sac through branch vessels of the aorta; Type III, graft defect or component misalignment; Type IV, leakage through the graft 
wall attributable to endograft porosity; and Type V, caused by “endotension,” possibly resulting from aortic pressure transmitted through the graft/
thrombus to the aneurysm sac. Adapted from Rokosh et al.2 Copyright 2021, with permission from Elsevier, Inc., and the Society for Vascular 
Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e352
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
inner-edge measurement on TTE images may also 
be considered, with some experienced investiga-
tors showing excellent measurement agreement.15
3.2. Conventions of Measurements
Reproducible and accurate measurements of the aorta 
are critical for characterizing aortic disease and guiding 
treatment decisions. Measurements should be obtained 
perpendicular to the long axis of the aorta at specified 
segmental locations (Figure 13), 1 with measurements 
also taken at the location of any abnormality. Unfortu-
nately, there is no widely accepted standard for aortic 
diameter measurements (eg, inner-edge to inner-edge, 
outer-edge to outer-edge) across imaging modalities. 
There is a wealth of historical data regarding using TTE 
to measure the aortic root (at end-diastole) from the 
leading-edge of the anterior wall to the leading-edge of 
the posterior wall, thus identifying the largest diameter.2,3 
These data allowed for the creation of normal limits 
adjusted for age, sex, and body size4 and provided insight 
regarding the prevalence and prognostic importance of 
aortic dilation.
On CT and MRI, the root diameter can be measured 
from the commissure to the opposite sinus, or from sinus 
to sinus, which results in larger dimensions (Figure 13).5 
Measuring from sinus-to-sinus and from inner-edge to 
inner-edge on CT and MRI has shown good correlation 
with TTE for measurements of the root and ascending 
segments,6 as well as improved confidence in the delin-
eation of aortic root margins on MRI and lower interob-
server and interobserver variability.7
Although aortic dilation as measured by diameter is a 
well-known risk factor for the occurrence of aortic dis-
section and rupture, 8 most dissections occur in aortas 
with diameters that do not meet the threshold for preven-
tive surgery.9 This has led investigators to search for bet-
ter metrics for risk stratification and treatment guidance. 
For instance, research has shown that ascending aortic 
area indexed to height is associated with aortic dissec-
tion and adverse outcomes in patients with tricuspid or 
bicuspid valves. 10,11 Male sex, age, height, weight, and 
the presence of traditional cardiovascular risk factors 
have also been found to correlate with increased aortic 
size in large population-based studies. 12 Aortic length is 
known to increase over time; spurred by this fact, and 
by the observation that intimal entry tears run in a trans-
verse direction, researchers have found that excessive 
elongation of the ascending aorta may be predictive of 
dissection and thus represents a potentially relevant 
measurement.13
Measurements of the arch and further distal seg-
ments should also be performed perpendicular to the 
aortic axis, with care taken to avoid oblique imaging that 
may overestimate the aortic diameter at levels of greater 
curvature and tortuosity. In the setting of wall changes 
Table 4. Essential Elements of CT and MRI Aortic Imaging 
Reports
1. Maximum aortic diameter at each level of dilation, perpendicular to the 
axis of blood ﬂow. In cases of asymmetric or oval contour, the longest 
diameter and its perpendicular diameter should be reported. Standard 
measurement levels may be included, even when normal.
2. Wall changes suggestive of atherosclerosis, diffuse thickening (eg, aor-
titis), or mural thrombus.
3. Evidence of luminal stenosis/occlusion, including location, severity, and 
length.
4. Findings suggestive of acute aortic syndrome (eg, communicating dis-
section, intramural hematoma, penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer, focal 
intimal tear), including proximal/distal extension (Figure 7), suspected 
entry tear site (if visible), and complications (eg, active contrast extrava-
sation, rupture, contained rupture, rupture including periaortic hemor-
rhage, pericardial and pleural ﬂuid, mediastinal stranding).
5. Extension of aortic disease process (acute or chronic) into branch 
vessels, ﬁndings suggestive of end-organ injury, and suspected 
malperfusion.
6. Direct comparison with previous examinations should be detailed to 
identify pertinent changes.
7. Presence and extent of repair (eg, interposition graft, endovascular 
stent graft), as well as any evidence of complication.
8. Impression regarding disease classiﬁcation (eg, acute aortic syndrome, 
aneurysm/pseudoaneurysm, luminal stenosis, atherosclerotic aortic 
disease).
9. Relevant details regarding method of image acquisition (eg, use of 
electrocardiographic-gating and phase of acquisition) and measure-
ment (eg, axial versus double oblique, inner-edge versus outer-edge) 
should be included.
CT indicates computed tomography; and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Table 5. Diagnostic Performance of Aortic Imaging Modalities
ParameterC TM RI TTET EE US
Availability +++ ++ +++ ++ +++
Portability --+++ +++ +++
Speed of acquisition +++ ++ ++ ++ +
Spatial resolution +++ ++ ++ +++ ++
Temporal resolution ++ + +++ +++ +++
Three-dimensional data set +++ ++ +++
Arch branch vessel evaluation +++ +++ ++ +N A
Evaluation of valve and ventricular function ++ + +++ +++ NA
CT indicates computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NA, not applicable; TEE, transesophageal echocar-
diography; TTE, transthoracic echocardiography; US, abdominal aortic ultrasound; +++ excellent results; ++ good results; + 
fair results; and -, not available.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e353
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
(eg, discrete thickening from atherosclerosis, aortitis, 
IMH, or other processes), the abnormal wall should be 
measured from outer-edge to outer-edge. To assess 
abdominal aortic dimensions, ultrasonographic images 
may be obtained in a dedicated examination or as part of 
a surface echocardiographic examination. Several stud-
ies have shown that the volume of an AAA may progress 
despite a stable diameter.14,15
3.2.1. Computed Tomography
CT can image the entire aorta and its branches with high 
spatial resolution and fast acquisition. The use of electro-
cardiographic-gated technique decreases motion artifact 
of the root and ascending aorta, 1 significantly increas-
ing the precision of measurements and diagnostic confi-
dence. When necessary, CT can be performed without the 
use of iodinated contrast, and such noncontrast imaging 
can still accurately provide diameter assessment of aor-
tic aneurysms that can suffice for surveillance of patients 
who cannot tolerate or cooperate with MRI, although aor-
tic wall delineation may be challenging in some instances 
(eg, at the aortic root level). The use of iodinated intra-
venous contrast allows for delineation between aortic 
lumen and wall and generally improves assessment of 
wall changes. In some instances, the potential concern of 
patient contrast allergy or renal toxicity may be a consid-
eration. However, according to recent consensus state-
ments from the American College of Radiology and the 
National Kidney Foundation, 2 the risk of acute kidney 
injury developing in patients with impaired renal function 
after exposure to intravenous iodinated contrast media 
has likely been overestimated given the difficulty distin-
guishing coincident from contrast-induced nephropathy.
CT has a very high sensitivity and specificity for acute 
aortic syndromes (AAS, aortic dissection, IMH, PAU)3 and 
traumatic aortic injuries. Moreover, CT can identify con-
comitant coronary involvement, 4 branch vessel involve-
ment, and hemopericardium, and may aid in identification 
of dissection entry tears. In patients whose CT is nega-
tive for AAS, the images may provide insight regarding 
other causes of the presenting chest pain. 5 When imag-
ing patients with a suspected AAS, a noncontrast series 
of images is typically obtained first, to better distinguish 
IMH, if present, from other causes of aortic wall thicken-
ing. Then, a series of arterial phase contrast-enhanced 
images is obtained with thin slice to allow for recon-
structions (computed tomographic angiography [CTA]), 
extending from the thoracic inlet to the level of the femo-
ral arteries, to define the full extent of any dissection and 
thereby guide therapy. For consistency in this document, 
CT is used to refer to computed tomography modality 
broadly, with specific imaging techniques chosen depen-
dent on a given clinical indication and patient history.
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI provides coverage of the entire aorta and branch 
vessels, can characterize aortic wall changes in the set-
ting of inflammation 1 and AAS, and offers physiologic 
assessment of ventricular and valve function plus flow 
quantification. MRI uses no ionizing radiation and can 
often be performed without intravenous contrast. MRI is 
therefore often a primary option for assessing congenital 
aortic abnormalities and is well-suited for serial imaging in 
younger patients. The use of electrocardiographic-gated 
imaging decreases motion artifact of the aortic root2 and 
of 3D datasets, critical for achieving precise, repeat-
able measurements.3 Limitations of MRI include spatial 
resolution that, although good, is typically inferior to that 
of CT, as well as the appearance of artifacts in patients 
Figure 12. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine the 
Presence and Progression of Aortic Disease.
(A) Schematic shows the leading-edge to leading-edge measurement 
technique used in echocardiography, from left to right: measurement 
of the aortic root (sinuses of Valsalva), sinotubular junction, and 
proximal tubular ascending aorta. (B) Inner-wall to inner-wall 
measurements of the aortic root used in MRI and CT. In addition, 
a consistent approach to measuring all 3 sinuses with MRI and 
CT is necessary. The sinus-to-commissure and sinus-to-sinus 
measurements can both be used, but consistency is necessary for 
interval surveillance. (C) Standard measurement locations for MRI and 
CT with the inner-wall to inner-wall technique. Adapted from Borger et 
al.21 Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier, Inc. CT indicates 
computed tomography; and MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. 
*Leading-edge to leading-edge. †Inner-wall to inner-wall.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e354
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
with indwelling metallic material or devices. Additionally, 
MRI is not as widely available as CT for aortic imaging, 
has a longer acquisition time, and the ability to monitor 
and treat unstable patients in the scanner is limited. This 
modality is therefore less commonly used in patients 
with suspected acute aortic pathology, 4 especially when 
patients are unstable. Various MRI sequences are avail-
able for aortic depiction, including magnetic resonance 
angiography (MRA), which involves volumetric acquisi-
tion of aortic anatomy, with slice thickness allowing for 
reconstruction of images in multiple planes. Intravenous 
gadolinium-based contrast media are often used in MRA, 
although there is a very small risk of inducing nephro-
genic systemic fibrosis in patients with underlying kidney 
disease, a risk that is particularly low with group II gad-
olinium-based contrast agents. 5,6 Additional sequences 
are often used for aortic anatomic depiction that do not 
require intravenous contrast media, such as cine gradient 
echo bright blood and spin echo dark blood sequences. 
For consistency in this document, we use MRI to refer 
to the modality of magnetic resonance imaging defined 
broadly, which potentially includes many sequences that 
are often combined in complementary manner within an 
imaging protocol.
3.2.3. Echocardiography
Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE)
TTE is the most common imaging modality used in the 
initial nonemergency assessment of the thoracic aorta.1,2 
TTE is particularly useful in imaging the aortic root and 
ascending aorta and in delineating aortic valve anatomy 
and function. Although not ideal for imaging of the aortic 
arch, TTE often does visualize the aortic arch branch ves-
sels and the proximal descending aorta and can aid in 
diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta (CoA) and patent 
ductus arteriosus. TTE is portable and can be performed 
at the bedside with a high spatial and temporal resolution. 
It can be useful in the evaluation of patients with AAS to 
detect complications, including aortic valve regurgitation, 
left ventricular dysfunction, and cardiac tamponade. TTE 
is useful in the longitudinal surveillance of aortic root and 
ascending aortic dilation, provided those aortic segments 
are well visualized.
Transesophageal Echocardiography (TEE)
TEE provides high-resolution images of most of the 
thoracic aorta, apart from a short segment of the distal 
ascending aorta just proximal to the innominate artery, 
attributable to acoustic shadowing from the trachea. TEE 
is also very useful in detailing aortic valve anatomy and 
function. TEE is particularly useful in the intraoperative 
evaluation of patients with AAS in guiding both operative 
and endovascular repair strategies and the assessment 
of true and false lumen flows before and immediately 
after aortic repair.1,2
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound
Intravascular ultrasound is an endovascular technology 
designed to provide high-resolution intraluminal imaging 
of localized arterial and venous disease. 1 Intravascular 
ultrasound is particularly useful in guiding the endovascu-
lar management of complex pathologies of the thoracic 
and abdominal aorta, because it reveals aortic size, tor-
tuosity, plaque burden, calcification, branch vessel ostia, 
and intravascular filling defects (eg, thrombus, dissection 
flap), in addition to permitting landing zone assessment.1 
Such intravascular ultrasound imaging data may help 
Figure 13. Reformatted CT Image 
Orthogonal to the Aortic Root at the 
Level of the Sinuses of Valsalva.
The root diameter can be measured 
from sinus-to-sinus (S-S) or sinus-to-
commissure (S-C). The aortic root area 
(A) can also be measured. CT indicates 
computed tomography; and ROI, region-
of-interest.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e355
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
to identify patients for whom endovascular treatment is 
high-risk or contraindicated. Intravascular ultrasound is 
especially useful in the setting of aortic dissection 2-4 to 
distinguish true and false lumen anatomy and thereby 
guide endovascular or open repair. Intravascular ultra-
sound may be used to guide deployment of endovascular 
stents and, during final assessment, to reduce the vol-
ume of iodinated contrast used.5 Importantly, intravascu-
lar ultrasound requires an operator who is familiar with 
both the acquisition and interpretation of images.
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound
Vascular ultrasound is an effective and rapid imaging 
modality and is the recommended diagnostic tool in 
screening for and surveillance of AAA. 1-3 The ultrasonic 
criterion for AAA is a diameter >3.0 cm, using primar-
ily the outer-edge to outer-edge measurement conven-
tion in the anterior-posterior or transverse view. 4-6 The 
sensitivity of ultrasound to detect the presence of an 
aneurysm approaches 100%, 7 although interobserver 
variability exists, and successful imaging can be limited 
by obesity and superimposed bowel gas.8
Using B-mode imaging, color Doppler, and spectral 
waveform analysis, a comprehensive ultrasound evalu-
ation of the abdominal aorta can quickly detect other 
aortic pathologies, such as plaque or mobile atheroma 
formation, arterial stenoses, mural thrombus, inflamma-
tion, dissection, pseudoaneurysm, contained rupture, and 
aortocaval fistulae, and these findings may prompt the 
need for further imaging with CT or MRI. Abdominal ultra-
sound can also be used for surveillance of patients who 
have undergone endovascular repair of AAA (EVAR); 
it can detect aneurysm sac expansion, which may indi-
cate the presence of an endoleak (Figure 11), defined 
as abnormal flow outside of the aortic endograft, a find-
ing that typically warrants confirmation by CT. The use 
of contrast-enhanced color duplex ultrasound has shown 
promising results in enhanced sensitivity in detection of 
endoleaks,9 although its use requires ongoing study.
4. MULTIDISCIPLINARY AORTIC TEAMS
Recommendations for Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. For patients with acute aortic disease that 
requires urgent repair, a multidisciplinary team 
should determine the most suitable interven-
tion.
2a C-LD
2. For patients who are asymptomatic with 
extensive aortic disease, or who may benefit 
from complex open and endovascular aortic 
repairs, or with multiple comorbidities for 
whom intervention is considered, referral to 
a high-volume center (performing at least 
30-40 aortic procedures annually) with expe-
rienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic 
Team is reasonable to optimize treatment 
outcomes.1-6
Synopsis
Evidence-based standards for medical and surgical con-
ditions recognize the critical relationship among both 
hospital and surgeon case volumes and patient out-
comes. Clinical excellence is further enhanced by collab-
orative, multispecialty teams to foster the best treatment 
of patients, especially for complex presentations with 
multiorgan threats. Although there is no agreed on defi-
nition of a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team, an appropriate 
framework might be: A specialized hospital team with 
an exceptionally high concentration of expertise in the 
evaluation and management of aortic disease, in which 
care is delivered in a comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
manner.7 The concept of comprehensive heart valve 
centers was formally codified in the “2020 ACC/AHA 
Guideline for the Management of the Patient With Val-
vular Heart Disease,”8 which emphasized the numerous 
essential components of such centers, ranging from phy-
sician expertise, experience, and technical skill to data 
collection, research, and education, to institutional facili-
ties and resources. Although the specific components of 
such teams may differ from center to center, the most 
common features that distinguish Multidisciplinary Aortic 
Teams include: Having cardiac surgical, vascular surgical, 
and endovascular specialists with extensive experience 
managing complex aortic disease at a center with a high 
volume of aortic interventions; having imaging specialists 
with expertise in aortic disease to perform and interpret 
CT, MRI, and echocardiography; anesthesiologists expe-
rienced in the management of acute aortic disease and 
cerebrospinal fluid drainage; and an intensive care unit 
(ICU) experienced in the management of acute aortic 
disease.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In cardiovascular care, we have long recognized 
the critical value of collaborative multidisciplinary 
expertise in cardiac transplantation and mechani-
cal circulatory support conducted only at centers 
of excellence. More recently, we have seen the 
rise in multidisciplinary heart teams focused on 
the care of patients with complex coronary artery 
disease and patients with complex heart valve 
disease; indeed, the important role of multidisci-
plinary heart valve teams was emphasized in the 
“2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management 
of the Patient With Valvular Heart Disease.”8 There 
is ample evidence that patients with complex aor-
tic disease may similarly benefit from treatment 
by such multidisciplinary teams. 6 Andersen et al 1 
compared the outcomes of patients with acute 
type A aortic dissection undergoing open surgical 
repair before and after implementation of a mul-
tidisciplinary thoracic aortic surgery program and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e356
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
found that operative mortality declined dramati-
cally after implementation of the multidisciplinary 
team and that the significant mortality advantage 
persisted over a 5-year follow-up (P =0.002). 
Likewise, in a report from England, 2 hospitals with 
multidisciplinary thoracic aortic programs reported 
significant reductions in mortality compared with 
hospitals without such programs.
2. In a study of 230 736 Medicare beneficiaries 
undergoing AAA repair between 2001 and 2006, 
in which hospital procedural volume for both open 
and endovascular repair was divided into quin-
tiles, the adjusted mortality decreased as hospital 
volume increased, by quintile, especially among 
the group undergoing open surgical repair. 3 The 
benefits of high case volume on surgical outcome 
apply similarly to patients with TAA. Hughes et al 4 
analyzed >13 000 elective aortic root and aortic 
valve-ascending aortic procedures performed at 
741 North American hospitals from 2004 to 2007 . 
They found a negative association between the 
hospital volume and the adjusted odds ratio (OR) 
for mortality (P <0.001), particularly at a hospital 
volume of <30 to 40 procedures annually (Figure 
14). The inverse relationship between center 
case volume and mortality was shown again 
in a more contemporary series by Mori et al 9 of 
>53 000 proximal thoracic aortic surgeries in the 
United States from 2011 to 2016 in which the 
risk of operative mortality decreased significantly 
when the annual center volume exceeded 20 to 
25 cases (only 116 US centers performed >20 
cases/y), and decreased significantly further still 
at an annual center volume of >50 cases (only 24 
Figure 14. Observed Relationship 
Between Annual Institutional Case 
Volume and Risk-Adjusted Odds 
Ratio for Operative Mortality ±2 
Standard Deviations as Assessed 
With Regression Analysis.
The odds ratio for operative mortality 
decreased as institutional case volume 
increased. Adapted from Hughes et al.4 
Copyright 2013, with permission from 
Elsevier Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e357
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
US centers performed >50 cases/y) (Figure 15). 
Perhaps the most consistent correlation between 
case volume and mortality rate is among patients 
with acute aortic dissection. In a retrospective 
review of 232 patients with acute type A aortic 
dissection who underwent urgent surgery in a 
single center in the United Kingdom, the 30-day 
mortality rate was significantly lower among those 
operated on by a surgeon with aortic expertise 
versus a nonaortic expert, at 10% versus 26%, 
respectively (P =0.02). Moreover, aortic special-
ists performed aortic root procedures significantly 
more often (43.0% versus 17 .3%; P =0.001), 
and their cross-clamp times were significantly 
shorter.5 Finally, Umana-Pizano et al 10 found that 
the mortality rate of acute type A aortic dissection 
repair was 14% versus 24% for high-volume and 
low-volume surgeons, respectively. Clearly not all 
patients with thoracic aortic disease (TAD) can be 
treated by Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams, espe-
cially in the setting of AAS. Nevertheless, when 
patients are referred for elective aortic interven-
tion, especially at aortic diameter thresholds that 
are borderline, the lower surgical mortality rate 
with expert aortic surgeons at high-volume cen-
ters may justify early aortic repair. Similarly, when 
aortic procedures are relatively new or complex, 
the best outcomes are likely to be at centers with 
high-volume operators who have experience with 
such novel techniques. Consequently, throughout 
this guideline is a number of recommendations in 
which it is specified that certain open surgical or 
endovascular aortic repairs be performed by expe-
rienced operators in centers with Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Teams.
5. SHARED DECISION-MAKING
Recommendations for Shared Decision-Making
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with aortic disease, shared deci-
sion-making is recommended when determin-
ing the appropriate thresholds for intervention, 
deciding on the type of surgical repair, choos-
ing between open surgical versus endovascu-
lar approaches; and in medical management 
and surveillance.1-6
1 C-EO
2. In patients with aortic disease who are contem-
plating pregnancy or who are pregnant, shared 
decision-making is recommended when con-
sidering the cardiovascular risks of pregnancy, 
the diameter thresholds for prophylactic aortic 
surgery, and the mode of delivery.
Synopsis
Shared decision-making is increasingly used in patient-
centered care as advocated by the National Academy of 
Medicine.7 Although no randomized trials have evaluated 
the value and effectiveness of shared decision-making, 
multiple position papers advocate strongly for the incor-
poration of shared decision-making in the care of patients 
with thoracic and AAAs.2-5 Decision aids have been devel-
oped for shared decision-making in patients with AAAs 
to help improve the patient understanding of the disease 
Figure 15. Predicted Risk of Mortality 
Derived From the Logistic Regression 
Model Without Center Case Volume 
as a Covariate.
Actual mortality and the ratio of actual 
mortality to predicted mortality (A/P ratio, 
the risk-adjusted mortality rate) are also 
shown. A similar predicted risk of mortality 
across the case volume strata and a 
decrease in the actual mortality at higher 
center case volume are seen. Reprinted 
from Mori et al.9 Copyright 2018, with 
permission from Elsevier Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e358
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
and treatment options.1 Shared decision-making is espe-
cially useful when considering the diameter thresholds 
for and the timing of intervention in addition to having an 
important role in considering the risks of pregnancy in 
patients with underlying aortic disease.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Shared decision-making is an active process in 
which patients and families are encouraged to 
share their values and preferences regarding qual-
ity of life, goals of care, and desired procedural 
outcomes. Formally recognizing those prefer-
ences helps physicians to better frame the risks 
and benefits of intervention versus conservative 
management. Actively involving patients in the 
decision-making process is especially important 
in situations in which there is clinical equipoise, 
such as: an aortic aneurysm with a diameter at the 
borderline of the threshold for repair; performing 
valve-sparing root repair rather than valved-conduit 
aortic root replacement; performing thoracic endo-
vascular aortic repair (TEVAR) in a patient with 
an uncomplicated type B aortic dissection who is 
at increased risk of complications; or treating an 
AAA with open surgical versus endovascular repair. 
Shared decision-making may be used for nonin-
terventional issues as well, such as the choice of 
medical therapies or the imaging modality used for 
surveillance.
2. Shared decision-making has an important role 
in pregnancy among those with aortic disease 
to determine whether to consider conception, 
an appropriate diameter threshold for prophy-
lactic aortic repair, and the mode of delivery. This 
has particular relevance in patients with Marfan 
syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, and other 
heritable aortic disorders who are planning a 
pregnancy.
6. ANEURYSMS
6.1. Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) Causes
TAAs occur in 5 to 10 per 100 000 person years. 1 The 
natural history and treatment vary depending on the 
cause and location of the TAA. The size of a given seg-
ment of the thoracic aorta is influenced by age, sex, 
height, and body size. 2 Aortic z-scores and other diam-
eter indexing methods (see Section 2.3, “Definitions of 
Dilation and Aneurysm of the Aortic Root and Ascend-
ing Thoracic Aorta”) may assist with risk assessment.3 Of 
all TAA, aneurysms of the aortic root, ascending aorta, 
or both are most common (∼60%), followed by those 
of the descending aorta (∼30%) and arch (<10%). 
Hypertension, smoking, hypercholesterolemia, and heri-
table genetic variants are risk factors for TAA disease. 
Patients with TAA have a modestly increased incidence 
of AAA4 and cerebral aneurysms.5
Causes of TAA include heritable disorders, congeni-
tal conditions, multifactorial degenerative conditions, 
previous aortic dissection, inflammatory diseases, and 
infectious diseases (Table 6). Aneurysms of the aortic 
root and ascending thoracic aorta tend to have a heri-
table influence and present at younger ages, whereas 
aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta tend to 
be degenerative and present at older ages. 6 Moreover, 
aneurysms of the aortic root and ascending thoracic 
aorta are also commonly associated with BAV, although 
the genetic basis of BAV and why some but not all 
patients have a concomitant aortopathy are not well 
understood. Finally, many aneurysms of the root and 
ascending thoracic aorta are sporadic and idiopathic. 
Because the management of patients with aneurysms 
of the aortic root and ascending thoracic aorta may dif-
fer depending on the underlying cause or family history, 
the recommendations for medical and surgical therapy 
are grouped accordingly in the document, as shown in 
Figure 16.
Table 6. Cause of TAA
HTAD (see Table 7): syndromic
Marfan syndrome
Loeys-Dietz syndrome
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome
Others: attributable to pathogenic variants in FLNA, BGN, LOX
HTAD (see Table 7): nonsyndromic
ACTA2, MYH11, PRKG1, MYLK, and others
Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm without identiﬁed pathogenic variants 
in a known gene for HTAD
Congenital conditions
Bicuspid aortic valve
Turner syndrome
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex congenital heart defects (tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of 
the great vessels, truncus arteriosus)
Hypertension
Atherosclerosis
Degenerative
Previous aortic dissection
Inﬂammatory aortitis
Giant cell arteritis
Takayasu arteritis
Behçet disease
Immunoglobulin G4-related disease, antineutrophil cytoplasmic anti-
body-related, sarcoidosis
Infectious aortitis
Bacterial, fungal, syphilitic
Previous traumatic aortic injury
HTAD indicates heritable thoracic aortic diseases; and TAA, thoracic aortic 
aneurysms.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e359
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Figure 16. Recommendations for Management of Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta According to Known 
Causative Factors.
Table 7.
11
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e360
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Table 7.
Figure 17. Evaluation and Genetic Testing Protocol for Patients With TAD.
Genetic testing is recommended for individuals with syndromic features, family history of TAD, and/or early age of disease onset. Thoracic aortic imaging is 
recommended for first-degree relatives of all individuals with TAD, regardless of age of onset, to detect asymptomatic aneurysms. Positive genetic testing 
should trigger gene-based management and cascade testing of at-risk relatives. When testing is negative or reveals variants of unknown significance, 
first-degree relatives should undergo screening aortic imaging. Modified with permission from Milewicz et al.6 Copyright 2021, Minerva Medica. Blue (+) 
indicates positive; green (–), negative; LDS, Loeys-Dietz syndrome; MFS, Marfan syndrome; TAAD, thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection; TAD, thoracic 
aortic disease; vEDS, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome; and VUS, variants of unknown significance. *Aneurysms are typically asymptomatic.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e361
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Approximately 20% of TAA are related to a genetic 
or heritable condition (also referred to as heritable tho-
racic aortic disease [HTAD]), some of which associ-
ate with multisystem features (considered syndromic 
HTAD) and others with abnormalities limited to the aorta 
with or without its branches (known as nonsyndromic 
HTAD)7 (Table 7). HTAD most commonly involves the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both but may also 
present with distal aortic disease and aortic dissec-
tion.8 Pathogenic variants in multiple genes can lead 
to TAA, cerebral aneurysms, and AAA. 7, 8 Up to 20% of 
individuals with a TAA or aortic dissection have a fam-
ily history of TAD, with at least 1 affected first-degree 
relative.8 Population studies have shown the familial 
nature of TAAs and dissections, with familial cases 
having a significantly increased risk of TAA and aortic 
dissection 8,9 compared with sporadic cases. Therefore, 
among patients with aortic root and ascending aortic 
aneurysm or those with aortic dissection, screening 
of first-degree relatives with imaging is essential to 
detect unrecognized, asymptomatic TAD. 8,10
6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative TAA
Although there is a well-recognized anatomic distinc-
tion between aneurysms of the thoracic versus abdomi-
nal aorta, this should not imply that all TAA are similar 
in cause or natural history. Aneurysms of the aortic root 
and ascending aorta are typically diagnosed at younger 
patient ages than aneurysms of the descending thoracic 
aorta (60 versus 72 years, respectively). 1 Even when 
considering just the “sporadic” aneurysms (ie, aneurysms 
in which there is no evidence of a syndromic, familial, 
or known genetic etiology), a significant difference in 
the ages between the 2 groups (64 versus 72 years, 
respectively) persists. 1 In addition, typical atherosclero-
sis risk factors (ie, hypertension, diabetes, smoking) are 
significantly less common in sporadic root and ascend-
ing versus descending aortic aneurysms. 2 Moreover, the 
prevalence of aortic calcification or atheroma (by CT or 
MRI) is quite low in sporadic aneurysms of the root and 
ascending thoracic aorta but quite high in aneurysms of 
the descending aorta, at 8% to 9% versus 80% to 88%, 
respectively.1 Collectively, these findings suggest that 
aneurysms of the aortic root and ascending aortic tend 
to have a congenital if not hereditary cause, whereas 
aneurysms of the descending aorta tend to have an 
atherosclerotic cause. Although sometimes referred to 
as atherosclerotic aneurysms, more often aneurysms 
of descending thoracic aorta (not related to connective 
tissue disorders) are referred to as “degenerative.” The 
medical management and surgical and endovascular 
management of sporadic and degenerative aneurysms 
are discussed in Sections 6.4, “Medical Management of 
Sporadic and Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm Disease,” 
and 6.5, “Surgical and Endovascular Management of 
Aortic Aneurysms,” respectively.
6.1.2. Genetic Aortopathies
6.1.2.1. HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of Family 
Members for TAD
Recommendations for HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of Family 
Members for TAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with aortic root/ascending aortic 
aneurysms or aortic dissection, obtaining a 
multigenerational family history of TAD, unex-
plained sudden deaths, and peripheral and 
intracranial aneurysms is  recommended.1-3
1 B-NR
2. In patients with aortic root/ascending 
aortic aneurysms or aortic dissection and 
risk factors for HTAD (Table 8, Figure 17), 
genetic testing to identify pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variants (ie, mutations) is 
 recommended.4-6
1 B-NR
3. In patients with an established pathogenic or 
likely pathogenic variant in a gene predispos-
ing to HTAD, it is recommended that genetic 
counseling be provided and the patient’s clini-
cal management be informed by the specific 
gene and variant in the gene.7-9
1 B-NR
4. In patients with TAD who have a pathogenic/
likely pathogenic variant, genetic testing of at-
risk biological relatives (ie, cascade testing) is 
recommended.6,10,11 In family members who are 
found by genetic screening to have inherited 
the pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant, aortic 
imaging with TTE (if aortic root and ascending 
aorta are adequately visualized, otherwise with 
CT or MRI) is recommended.4,5,12
1 B-NR
5. In a family with aortic root/ascending aor-
tic aneurysms or aortic dissection, if the 
disease-causing variant is not identified 
with genetic testing, screening aortic imag-
ing (as per recommendation 4) of at-risk 
biological relatives (ie, cascade testing) is 
 recommended.13-15
1 C-LD
6. In patients with aortic root/ascending aor-
tic aneurysms or aortic dissection, in the 
absence of either a known family history of 
TAD or pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant, 
screening aortic imaging (as per recommen-
dation 4) of first-degree relatives is recom-
mended.13
1 C-EO
7 . In patients with acute type A aortic dissection, 
the diameter of the aortic root and ascending 
aorta should be recorded in the operative note 
and medical record to inform the management 
of affected  relatives.
Table 8. Risk Factors for Familial TAD
TAD and syndromic features of Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, 
or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
TAD presenting at age <60 y
A family history of either TAD or peripheral/intracranial aneurysms in a 
ﬁrst- or second-degree relative
A history of unexplained sudden death at a relatively young age in a ﬁrst- 
or second-degree relative
TAD indicates thoracic aortic disease.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e362
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Synopsis
A major risk factor for aortic root aneurysms, ascend-
ing aortic aneurysms, and aortic dissection is a patho-
genic variant in genes predisposing to TAD. Although the 
recommendations focus on individuals at high risk for a 
single gene mutation (Table 8), genetic testing may have 
a role in many TAD patients. A multigene panel compris-
ing all genes suspected to cause HTAD is the most cost-
effective and clinically useful approach to testing. Only 
pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants are disease-
causing and should be used for cascade genetic test-
ing all relatives at risk for inheriting the disease-causing 
variant.15,16
In families with HTAD in which the causative gene 
has not been identified, the clinical features in affected 
family member should dictate management of other 
family members, including location of aneurysms; rel-
evant clinical features include the diameter of the aortic 
root and ascending aorta in affected family members 
who have had a type A dissection (noting that the aortic 
root typically is not distorted by the dissection, whereas 
the ascending aorta may acutely enlarge 17) and other 
vascular disease or features segregating with TAA in 
the family.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Current data indicate that 13% to 20% of 
patients with TAD and without Marfan syndrome 
or Loeys-Dietz syndrome features have similarly 
affected first-degree relatives. 1,2 TAD in these 
families is typically inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner, with decreased penetrance, 
particularly in women. These data suggest that 
heterozygous pathogenic variants in single 
genes are responsible for HTAD in most fami-
lies.3,18 In families with HTAD, testing in an indi-
vidual diagnosed with TAD should be initiated. 
Patients with a family history of the disease 
present at younger ages (average 57 years). 3 
These families with HTAD show variable expres-
sion of TAD, including varying age of disease 
onset, frequency of aortic dissection at a diame-
ter <5.0 cm, risk for type B aortic dissection, and 
frequency with which dilation involves the aortic 
root, the tubular ascending aorta, or both. 8,14 In 
addition, the specific altered gene impacts the 
risk for associated vascular conditions.
2. The HTAD genetic testing panels include (at the 
time of this writing) 11 genes that are confirmed 
to confer a highly penetrant risk for TAD: FBN1, 
LOX, COL3A1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, 
TGFB2, ACTA2, MYH11, MYLK, and PRKG1. 19 
These panels also include genes that increase 
the risk for TAD and/or lead to systemic features 
that overlap with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. 
Clinical genetic testing is integral to the diag-
nostic evaluation of patients with TAD who have 
clinical indicators suggestive of an underlying 
single gene disorder (Table 8). 5,20 In patients who 
meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Marfan 
syndrome but do not have ectopia lentis (ie, dis-
located lens), genetic testing is reasonable to 
exclude an alternative diagnosis of Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome. Genetic testing laboratories categorize 
rare variants in HTAD genes into these classes: 
pathogenic, likely pathogenic, variant of uncer-
tain/unknown significance, benign, and likely 
benign. Variants of unknown significance have 
not been confirmed to cause TAD and therefore 
should not be used either to identify which fam-
ily members are at risk or to guide clinical man-
agement. Because a subset of these variants of 
unknown significance may, nevertheless, be dis-
ease-causing, families with the potential to help 
further classify the variant of unknown signifi-
cance should be evaluated in collaboration with 
the genetic testing company.
3. FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, and TGFB2  
mutations have been identified in approximately 
6% to 8% of HTAD families whose members 
do not have syndromic features of Marfan syn-
drome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 12,20-23 Mutations 
in ACTA2, MYH11, MYLK, LOX, and PRKG1 have 
been confirmed to cause HTAD in the absence of 
significant features of Marfan syndrome or Loeys-
Dietz syndrome. 16,24 Through clinical characteriza-
tion of HTAD families with pathogenic variants in 
novel genes, data have emerged that the underly-
ing gene predicts not only who in the family is at 
risk for thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection 
(TAAD) but also the aortic disease presentation, 
risk for aortic dissection at a given range of aor-
tic diameters as described previously, and risk for 
and type of additional vascular diseases. 7-9 For 
example, TGFBR2 mutations predispose to TAAD 
but also to intracranial aneurysms and aneurysms 
and dissections of other arteries, whereas ACTA2  
mutations lead to TAAD and occlusive vascular 
disease, including early onset stroke and coro-
nary artery disease. Genetic counseling is useful 
to explain to patients and families the genetic risk 
and how it is inherited, to assess the family his-
tory to determine TAD risk, to assist in cascade 
genetic testing and/or imaging for TAD in family 
members, and to offer psychosocial and ethical 
guidance.10
4. Cascade screening is the process of extend-
ing imaging to identify asymptomatic thoracic 
aortic enlargement to individuals at risk within a 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e363
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
family for inheriting the pathogenic variant caus-
ing HTAD in the family; the process is repeated as 
family members are identified with thoracic aortic 
enlargement or as carriers of the pathogenic vari-
ant are identified. 10 Pathogenic variants in genes 
for HTAD confer a high risk for TAD, so individuals 
found to have these pathogenic variants should 
be screened with aortic imaging for asymptomatic 
TAD.16,24
5. Among patients undergoing genetic testing, 
many will not have a pathogenic variant identified, 
despite other clinical evidence that the disease 
is likely genetically triggered (eg, extensive family 
history of TAD or early onset sporadic TAD with 
no risk factors). Despite the absence of a patho-
genic variant among the currently known genes 
that were tested, TAD could still be inherited in 
the family attributable to a causative genetic vari-
ant that has yet to be identified. Consequently, 
multiple studies have confirmed the utility of 
screening aortic imaging of at-risk relatives of 
all TAD patients with a positive family history. 13-15 
If negative, repeat screening imaging might be 
worthwhile in 5 years of younger family members 
or 10 years in older family members, informed 
by the family history. Additionally, it is critical to 
obtain relevant clinical data from affected fam-
ily members, including the location of the aortic 
dilation (ie., the aortic root versus the ascending 
aorta), current aortic diameter or diameter at the 
time of surgical repair or diameter at the time 
of type A aortic dissection, and the presence of 
other vascular diseases (eg, aneurysms in other 
arteries, early onset occlusive vascular diseases), 
as these will inform management of all affected 
family members. The HTADs vary in terms of the 
risk of other clinical cardiovascular complications 
that segregate with TAD; therefore, surveillance 
for such conditions is best guided by the family 
history.22,25-27
6. Although the data are more limited, studies also 
support the screening of first-degree relatives of 
patients with TAD who do not have a family history 
of the disease.13 If negative, aortic imaging may be 
repeated years later, depending on the relative’s 
age and aortic size. It should be recognized that 
there is no upper limit to the age at which patients 
present with TAD that precludes an underlying 
genetic cause of the disease.
7 . Because the size at which the aortic root or ascend-
ing aorta dissects impacts the risk of aortic dissec-
tion in other affected family members, the specific 
aortic diameters should be recorded in the medical 
record (ie, operative report, discharge summary), so 
that the information can be readily retrieved when 
needed in the future.
6.1.2.1.1. Surgical Considerations for Nonsyndromic 
Heritable TAAs and No Identified Genetic Cause
Recommendations for Surgical Considerations for Nonsyndromic 
Heritable TAA and No Identified Genetic Cause
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms 
of the aortic root or ascending aorta with 
nonsyndromic heritable thoracic aortic dis-
ease (nsHTAD) and no identified genetic 
cause, determining the timing of surgical 
repair requires shared decision-making and 
is informed by known aortic diameters at the 
time of aortic dissection, TAA repair, or both in 
affected family members.1-4
1 C-LD
2. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of 
the aortic root or ascending aorta with  
nsHTAD and no identified genetic cause but 
no information on aortic diameters at the time 
of dissection or aneurysm repair in affected 
family members and who have no high-risk 
features for adverse aortic events (Table 9) it 
is recommended to repair the aorta when the 
maximal diameter reaches ≥5.0 cm.1
2a C-LD
3. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root 
or ascending aorta with nsHTAD and no 
identified genetic cause and a maximal aortic 
diameter of ≥4.5 cm, who have high-risk fea-
tures for adverse aortic events (Table 9), or 
who are undergoing cardiac surgery for other 
indications, aortic repair is reasonable when 
performed by experienced surgeons in a Mul-
tidisciplinary Aortic Team.5
Synopsis
HTAD refers to TAD caused by a highly penetrant rare 
variant (or mutation) in a single gene. A diagnosis of 
HTAD is based on ≥2 members of a family with TAD, the 
identification of a pathogenic variant in the gene known 
to cause TAD in a family member, or clinical diagnosis of 
syndrome that confers a risk for TAD (eg, Marfan syn-
drome) in a family member. Syndromic HTAD typically 
has systemic features with multiorgan phenotype, posi-
tive family history of aortic aneurysm or dissection, and is 
often caused by mutations involving extracellular matrix 
proteins or involved in transforming growth factor-β 
pathway. Such patients, including Marfan syndrome and 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, are predisposed to developing 
aneurysms of the aortic root and ascending aorta at an 
early age, and have a faster rate of aortic growth than 
do those with sporadic aneurysms. Consequently, these 
Table 9. Features Associated With an Increased Risk of 
Aortic Dissection in Patients With Heritable Thoracic Aortic 
Aneurysms
Heritable Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and No Identiﬁed Genetic Cause
Family history of aortic dissection at an aortic diameter <5.0 cm
Family history of unexplained sudden death at age <50 y
Rapid aortic growth (/g1160.5 cm in 1 y or /g1160.3 cm/y in 2 consecutive y)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e364
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
patients have a higher risk of acute aortic dissection or 
rupture, resulting in a shorter life expectancy than those 
patients whose aneurysms are not genetically medi-
ated. Prophylactic surgery to replace the aortic root and 
ascending aorta has dramatically improved the overall 
life expectancy of HTAD patients. Prophylactic elec-
tive surgery in these young patients requires a very low 
operative mortality with a multidisciplinary approach for 
genetic testing and lifelong surveillance. Surgeons in 
Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams have shown sufficiently 
low operative mortality to safely treat these patients at 
smaller aortic sizes. Similar to what is seen with sporadic 
aneurysms, aortic dissection in HTAD can occur at aortic 
diameters smaller than the surgical thresholds recom-
mended in guidelines.
nsHTAD refers to a genetic predisposition to TAD 
running in families in the absence of systemic features. 
NsHTAD may be present in up to 20% of patients with 
TAD (based on family history), is typically inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner, with a pathogenic genetic 
variant identified in up to 20%. When no pathogenic 
variant is identified in families with nsHTAD, it has often 
been referred to as “familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and 
dissection.” It tends to be more penetrant and of earlier 
onset in men than women within affected families. The 
diagnosis is often delayed until midlife but occurs earlier 
than for sporadic aneurysms; aneurysm growth is also 
typically faster than for sporadic aneurysms. Because 
the initial presentation is commonly acute aortic dissec-
tion, screening family members is important to guide pro-
phylactic surgery to prevent potential aortic dissection. 
Clearly, elective surgery before aortic dissection yields 
better long-term survival with fewer aortic reinterventions 
than surgery after aortic dissection.4-7
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The GenTAC (National Registry of Genetically 
Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and 
Cardiovascular Conditions) study found a higher 
risk of dissection, with most of dissection patients 
not having met the size criteria for prophylactic sur-
gery.1,6 For patients with a family history of TAA, 
aortic dissection, or both, but with no known patho-
genic variant, it is useful to determine the size at 
which the aorta dissected (if known) or the size 
at which elective aortic surgery was performed, 
as well as the age of the affected relative at time 
of the aortic event. It is appropriate to offer aortic 
repair based on the family member’s aortic size at 
dissection or elective surgery.
2. Patients with a family history of TAAs but with 
no known pathogenic variant may not have 
information regarding the aneurysm size at 
which the family members underwent either 
elective surgery or experienced aortic dissection. 
However, the GenTAC study suggested a higher 
risk of aortic dissection, with a large proportion 
of patients not having met the 5.5-cm threshold 
for elective repair at the time of their aortic dis-
section. Given that aortic dissection in this popu-
lation with familial TAAs may occur at younger 
ages and with worse outcomes and the more 
frequent need for reoperations, prophylactic sur-
gery is warranted when the maximal diameter of 
the aortic root or ascending aorta reaches ≥ 5.0 
cm.1-4,8
3. For patients with a family history of aortic dissection 
at a known maximal aortic root or ascending aortic 
diameter <5.0 cm but with no known pathogenic 
variant, it is reasonable to perform prophylactic aor-
tic repair at a maximal aortic diameter of ≥4.5 cm, 
because their affected relative experienced an 
aortic dissection at the relatively small diameter 
of <5.0 cm. Similarly, patients with relatives whose 
aortic dissection or unexplained sudden death 
occurred at an age <50 years are themselves at 
increased risk of such adverse events at ages <50 
years as well. Similarly, nsHTAD patients who have 
documented rapid aneurysm growth are increased 
risk of untoward aortic events at younger ages 
and smaller aneurysm sizes, so prophylactic aor-
tic surgery is reasonable when performed by 
experienced surgeons in Multidisciplinary Aortic 
Teams, with shown excellent short- and long-term 
outcomes.1-4,8
6.1.2.2. Marfan Syndrome
6.1.2.2.1. Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging 
in Marfan Syndrome
Recommendations for Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging in 
Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
Initial Diagnosis and Surveillance Imaging
1 C-EO
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome, a TTE 
is recommended at the time of initial 
diagnosis, to determine the diameters of 
the aortic root and ascending aorta, and 6 
months thereafter, to determine the rate 
of aortic growth; if the aortic diameters 
are stable, an annual surveillance TTE is 
recommended. 1 If the aortic root, ascending 
aorta, or both are not adequately visualized 
on TTE, a CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta is 
recommended. 2
2a C-EO
2. In adults with Marfan syndrome, after the 
initial TTE, a CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta 
is reasonable to confirm the aortic diameters 
and assess the remainder of the thoracic 
aorta.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e365
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Imaging After Aortic Root Replacement
1 C-LD
3. In patients with Marfan syndrome who have 
undergone aortic root replacement, surveil-
lance imaging of the thoracic aorta by MRI 
(or CT) is recommended to evaluate for distal 
TAD, initially annually and then, if normal in 
diameter and unchanged after 2 years, every 
other year.3-6
2a C-LD
4. In patients with Marfan syndrome who have 
undergone aortic root replacement, surveil-
lance imaging every 3 to 5 years for potential 
AAA is reasonable.2,6
Synopsis
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant connec-
tive tissue disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the 
FBN1 gene affecting 1 in 5 000 individuals.1 Phenotypic 
features in the skeletal, ocular, pulmonary, cutaneous, ner-
vous, and cardiovascular systems may be recognized. The 
modified Ghent criteria for diagnosis incorporate genetic 
testing, the systemic score, ectopia lentis, and the family 
history.1 Patients with Marfan syndrome develop aneu-
rysms involving the aortic root (sinuses of Valsalva) and 
are at risk for aortic dissection. 1 Descending aortic and 
AAAs are less common.6,7 T ype B aortic dissection is the 
initial aortic event in about 10% of patients and may also 
occur despite previous root replacement. 4 Imaging sur-
veillance of the aorta is typically performed annually, with 
the frequency dependent on age, aortic diameter, rate 
of aortic growth, and family history. 8 Prophylactic aortic 
root replacement for aneurysm disease prevents type A 
dissection and improves survival in Marfan syndrome.3,9,10
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Aortic root dilation and type A aortic dissection 
are the leading causes of morbidity and mortality 
in Marfan syndrome.9,10 Aortic dilation involves the 
aortic root, but effacement of the sinotubular junc-
tion with enlargement of the proximal ascending 
aorta is often present.11 The aortic root and ascend-
ing aorta are measured by TTE and are observed 
annually. Nomograms accounting for age, sex, and 
body size (and height) assist with determining the 
degree to which the diameter deviates from normal 
in the general population.12 In patients with Marfan 
syndrome participating in trials of beta block-
ers versus angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), 
the mean growth of the aortic root was 1 mm to 
1.5 mm over 3 years and 4 mm to 5 mm over 5 
years. The rate of aortic dilation is faster in patients 
with larger aortic aneurysms. More frequent imag-
ing is performed in patients with rapid aortic growth, 
in those approaching surgical thresholds, or when 
the diameter exceeds 4.5 cm. Patients with Marfan 
syndrome are at greatest risk for aneurysmal dila-
tion of the aortic root, followed by involvement of 
the ascending aorta. Patient-specific factors, such 
as pectus deformities and lung disease, may limit 
the evaluation of the aortic root on TTE. When the 
aortic root and ascending aorta are not adequately 
visualized by TTE, CT or MRI should be performed 
to measure the aortic diameters, 2 although TEE is 
another alternative to measure the aortic root and 
ascending aorta.
2. Patients with Marfan syndrome may develop dis-
ease of the descending aorta. 9,10 In some indi-
viduals, a thorough TTE may accurately assess 
the diameters of aortic root, ascending aorta, 
aortic arch, proximal descending aorta, and distal 
descending aorta. For patients undergoing an ini-
tial evaluation in whom the aortic segments distal 
to the ascending aorta are not adequately visual-
ized on TTE, a CT or MRI can be used to assess 
the more distal aortic segments.
3. Surgical aortic root replacement can prevent 
type A aortic dissection and improve longevity for 
patients with Marfan syndrome and aortic root 
aneurysms.3,9,10 Long-term complications after aor-
tic root replacement may include graft infections, 
pseudoaneurysms, aneurysms in the distal aorta, 
and aortic dissection distal to the graft.4,13
4. In patients with Marfan syndrome, distal TAA and 
AAA (in the absence of aortic dissection) may 
occur but are much less common than aortic root 
disease. Most individuals with aortic disease distal 
to the root have had previous root replacement or 
smoke cigarettes.7 ,13
6.1.2.2.2. Medical Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
Recommendations for Medical Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome, treatment 
with either a beta blocker or an ARB, in maxi-
mally tolerated doses (unless contraindicated), 
is recommended to reduce the rate of aortic 
dilation.1,2
2a C-LD
2. In patients with Marfan syndrome, the use of 
both a beta blocker and an ARB, in maximally 
tolerated doses (unless contraindicated), is 
reasonable to reduce the rate of aortic dila-
tion.3,4
Synopsis
Beta blockers have long been recommended for patients 
with Marfan syndrome to reduce heart rate and myocar-
dial contractility and to slow aortic root growth. 5-7 More 
recently, ARBs have also been found to be efficacious in 
Marfan syndrome.1-4,8
Recommendations for Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging in 
Marfan Syndrome (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e366
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In an open-label study of patients with Marfan 
syndrome who were observed for >10 years, pro-
pranolol treatment was associated with a reduc-
tion in aortic root growth rate and fewer clinical 
events5 compared with control (no treatment). More 
recently, in a retrospective evaluation of children 
with Marfan syndrome, beta-blocker treatment 
was associated with a reduced aortic growth rate.6 
Losartan was shown to prevent aneurysm forma-
tion in mouse models of Marfan syndrome9 and, in 
a small, nonrandomized open label study of children 
with Marfan syndrome who had previously had rapid 
aortic root growth, ARBs were shown to dramati-
cally slow aortic root growth. 10 However, random-
ized trials comparing an ARB to a beta blocker in 
patients with Marfan syndrome found no significant 
difference in the rate of either aortic root growth 
or clinical events (including aortic surgery or aortic 
dissection) between the 2 treatment groups.1,2
2. Multiple trials have compared the addition of 
an ARB to beta-blocker therapy in patients with 
Marfan syndrome3,4,8; in 2 studies, the addition of 
an ARB led to a reduction of aortic root growth 
rates over a 3- to 5-year follow-up, 3,4 and a meta-
analysis confirmed slower aortic growth rates with 
combination therapy.11
6.1.2.2.3. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: 
Replacement of the Aortic Root in Patients With 
Marfan Syndrome
Recommendations for Marfan Syndrome Interventions: Replacement of 
the Aortic Root in Patients With Marfan Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an 
aortic root diameter of ≥5.0 cm, surgery to 
replace the aortic root and ascending aorta is 
recommended.1-4
2a B-NR
2. In patients with Marfan syndrome, an aortic 
root diameter of ≥4.5 cm, and features associ-
ated with an increased risk of aortic dissection 
(see Table 10), surgery to replace the aortic 
root and ascending aorta is reasonable, when 
performed by experienced surgeons in a Mul-
tidisciplinary Aortic Team.1,3,4
2a C-LD
3. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a maxi-
mal cross-sectional aortic root area (cm2) 
to patient height (m) ratio of ≥10, surgery to 
replace the aortic root and ascending aorta is 
reasonable, when performed by experienced 
surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.5
2b C-LD
4. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an aor-
tic diameter approaching surgical threshold, 
who are candidates for valve-sparing root 
replacement (VSRR) and have a very low 
surgical risk, surgery to replace the aortic root 
and ascending aorta may be reasonable when 
performed by experienced surgeons in a Mul-
tidisciplinary Aortic Team.2-4
Synopsis
Prophylactic aortic root replacement for aneurysm dis-
ease prevents type A aortic dissection and improves 
survival in Marfan syndrome. 6-8 The size threshold for 
elective surgery to replace the dilated aortic root in Mar-
fan syndrome is dependent on many factors, including 
the patient’s age, height and weight, family history, rate 
of aortic growth, and other patient-specific factors. 1,3-5,9 
In patients with Marfan syndrome who are managed with 
optimal medical therapy and whose aortic diameters are 
<5.0 cm, the risk of aortic dissection is low.3,4,10 However, 
the risk of aortic dissection increases when the aortic 
diameter is >5.0 cm and is greater in patients with a fam-
ily history of aortic dissection or rapid aortic growth.3,4,10
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a dilated 
aortic root, elective aortic root and ascending aortic 
replacement before aortic dissection improves sur-
vival.6-8 A landmark report in 1995 documented the 
marked improvement in lifespan among patients 
with Marfan syndrome treated with elective aortic 
repair compared with historical controls from previ-
ous eras.6,10 Although risk of aortic dissection is low 
in patients with Marfan syndrome who are receiv-
ing appropriate medical care and lifestyle modifica-
tions, the risk of aortic dissection increases when 
the aortic diameter is >5.0 cm. 3,4,11 When pro-
phylactic surgical aortic repair is performed, both 
the aortic root and ascending aorta are replaced; 
although some centers have advocated including 
hemiarch replacement in patients at the time of 
elective root/ascending aorta replacement, data to 
support this approach are lacking.
2. In large series of patients with Marfan syndrome, 
about 20% have undergone elective surgery when 
aortic root diameters are <5.0 cm. 3,4,11 Predictors 
of aortic dissection and other adverse aortic out-
comes in Marfan syndrome are listed in Table 10. 
Indications for earlier aortic surgery may include 
rapid aortic growth (≥0.3 cm/y), family history of 
aortic dissection, desire for pregnancy, severe valve 
regurgitation, and patient preference.3,9,12 For most 
patients with Marfan syndrome, aortic growth rates 
are relatively slow, but the growth rate increases 
with aortic size.12
Table 10. Features Associated With Increased Risk of Aortic 
Complications in Marfan Syndrome
Family history of aortic dissection
Rapid aortic growth (/g1160.3 cm/y)
Diffuse aortic root and ascending aortic dilation14
Marked vertebral arterial tortuosity15
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e367
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
3. Aortic diameters vary depending on age, sex, 
height, and body size. Aortic event rates, includ-
ing aortic dissection, increase as the aortic size 
indexed to height (or body size) increases. When 
the maximal cross-sectional area in square (cm 2) 
of the aortic root or ascending aorta divided by the 
patient’s height (m) is ≥ 10 cm 2/m, prophylactic 
aortic root replacement is reasonable; when this 
cross-sectional area to height ratio was used to 
guide prophylactic surgery, patients had favorable 
outcomes.
4. Aortic root replacement is associated with a very 
low surgical risk 3,4,11 when performed by experi-
enced surgeons in Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams. 
The 2 aortic root replacement procedures per-
formed most commonly in the United States are 
a composite valved graft conduit and a VSRR. 13 
The composite valved graft conduit consists of a 
prosthetic aortic valve (typically mechanical but 
may be bioprosthetic) and aortic graft, with reim-
plantation of the coronary arteries (often referred 
to as the modified Bentall procedure). The VSRR 
uses the David procedure, in which the native 
aortic valve is reimplanted into a prosthetic aortic 
graft that is attached to the left ventricular outflow 
tract proximally and to the ascending aorta distally. 
The advantage of the VSRR is that, if successful, 
patients can potentially avoid the lifelong risks and 
complications associated with prosthetic valves. 
Consequently, early prophylactic surgery can be 
considered when both the procedural and late risks 
are low. However, durability of the spared native 
aortic valve is a potential concern; in one series of 
239 patients with Marfan syndrome undergoing 
VSRR, 7% developed at least moderate AR at 1 
year follow-up.13
6.1.2.2.4. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: 
Replacement of Primary (Nondissected) Aneurysms 
of the Aortic Arch, Descending, and Abdominal Aorta 
in Patients With Marfan Syndrome
Recommendation for Replacement of Primary (Nondissected) 
Aneurysms of the Aortic Arch, Descending, and Abdominal Aorta in 
Patients With Marfan Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendation
2a C-EO
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and a 
nondissected aneurysm of the aortic arch, 
descending thoracic aorta, or abdominal 
aorta of ≥5.0 cm, surgical intervention 
to replace the aneurysmal segment is 
 reasonable.
Synopsis
Marfan syndrome most commonly leads to aneurysms 
of the aortic root and ascending aorta but may also 
affect the distal aorta and its branches. 1-4 Unfortunately, 
there are no large datasets to inform the risk of aortic 
dissection or rupture in patients with Marfan syndrome 
with primary (nondissected) aneurysms of the aortic arch, 
descending, or abdominal aorta, so using a 5.0-cm diam-
eter threshold for surgery, as is used for the aortic root, 
is reasonable.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Although uncommon, aortic segments distal to 
the aortic root and ascending aorta may dilate in 
Marfan syndrome, and this occurs more often after 
elective aortic root replacement or after a previ-
ous aortic dissection involving these segments. 5 
In patients at acceptable risk for operative repair 
or with a long life expectancy, operative interven-
tion to resect primary (nondissected) aneurysms 
involving the arch, descending, or abdominal aorta 
is reasonable at an aortic diameter threshold of 
≥5.0 cm, depending on the patient’s age, rate of 
aortic growth, family history, and surgical risk. T ype 
B aortic dissection occurs in about 10% of Marfan 
patients, often in the absence of significant dila-
tion of the descending aorta, and is sometimes 
associated with prior elective aortic root replace-
ment,1 a previous aortic dissection elsewhere, 6 or 
pregnancy.7
6.1.2.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
6.1.2.3.1. Imaging in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
Recommendations for Imaging in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, a 
baseline TTE is recommended to determine 
the diameters of the aortic root and ascending 
aorta, and 6 months thereafter to determine 
the rate of aortic growth; if the aortic diam-
eters are stable, annual surveillance TTE is 
recommended.1-3
1 C-EO
2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and 
a dilated or dissected aorta and/or arterial 
branches at baseline, annual surveillance 
imaging of the affected aorta and arteries with 
MRI or CT is recommended.1
1 C-LD
3. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, a 
baseline MRI or CT from head to pelvis is 
recommended to evaluate the entire aorta 
and its branches for aneurysm, dissection, and 
tortuosity.1-4
2a C-EO
4. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome with-
out dilation of the aorta distal to the aortic 
root or ascending aorta and without dilated 
or dissected arterial branches, surveillance 
imaging from chest to pelvis with MRI (or 
CT) every 2 years is reasonable, but imaging 
may be more frequent depending on family 
 history.
2a C-EO
5. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome with-
out dilation of the cerebral arteries on initial 
screening, periodic imaging surveillance for 
cerebral aneurysms with MRI or CT every 2 to 
3 years is reasonable.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e368
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Synopsis
Loeys-Dietz syndrome is characterized by aortic and 
branch vessel aneurysms and dissections, arterial tortuos-
ity, and skeletal features similar to those seen in Marfan 
syndrome but with unique craniofacial and cutaneous fea-
tures.1 Pathogenic variants in 5 genes cause Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome, also termed transforming growth factor-β vas-
culopathies.1-3,5,6 Some pathogenic variants in Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome genes, in particular TGFBR1 and TGFBR2, may 
have earlier onset TAD. 7 All the Loeys-Dietz syndrome 
genes confer a risk for aortic involvement distal to the 
aortic root along with branch vessel and intracranial aneu-
rysms.1,8-11 Most clinical information is available in patients 
with TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 pathogenic variants.1,8 Patho-
genic variants in SMAD3 are associated with premature 
osteoarthritis and later onset of TAD.9,12 There is much less 
information about the aortic and branch vessel disease in 
patients with variants in TGFB2 and TGFB3.13-16 Imaging 
with CT or MRI, from head to pelvis, is indicated to evalu-
ate for aneurysms and arterial tortuosity.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Aortic root and ascending aortic aneurysm and 
aortic dissection are leading causes of morbidity 
and mortality in Loeys-Dietz syndrome.1,8,9,12 Aortic 
dissection may occur at relatively small aortic 
diameters in Loeys-Dietz syndrome when related 
to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, and 
SMAD3.1,2,6 The specific genetic variant and sever-
ity of extra-aortic phenotypic features, including 
craniofacial features, degree of arterial tortuosity, 
cutaneous findings, and family history inform the 
risk of aortic events.1,2,6 The aortic root and ascend-
ing aortic diameters are typically measured by TTE. 
BAV is more common in Loeys-Dietz syndrome and 
can be diagnosed by TTE. 17 Patients with Loeys-
Dietz syndrome attributable to certain pathogenic 
variants are at risk for aortic dissection at relatively 
small aortic diameters. 1,8 In patients with Loeys-
Dietz syndrome, the stability of the aortic size 6 
months after the initial diagnosis should be deter-
mined, and then, once stability is confirmed, moni-
tored with annual surveillance imaging.1,2
2. Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome may have vari-
able aortic and branch vessel involvement and vari-
able rates of dilation of involved arterial segments 
over time. In Loeys-Dietz syndrome patients with 
aortic aneurysm or previous dissection, relatively 
rapid arterial enlargement may occur.2,18,19
3. Patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome are at risk 
for widespread aortic and branch vessel aneurys-
mal disease and dissections. 1,12 In a series of 90 
patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable 
to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2, 
aneurysm disease involved the ascending aorta 
in 78%, arch in 10%, descending aorta in 10%, 
abdominal aorta and branches in 17%, thoracic 
aortic branches in 21%, and head and neck arterial 
branches in 10%. 1 Among patients with SMAD3-
related disease, aneurysms from head to pelvis are 
also described.9,12 Individuals with Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome can be at risk for TAD and other vascular 
diseases in the absence of other systemic features 
characteristic of Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome. Although there is phenotypic overlap 
among the genes, there is also distinct vascular 
disease and systemic complications associated 
with each gene. The physician should be cognizant 
of the particular gene variant in monitoring and 
managing patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome.
4. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and aortic 
disease limited to segments that are well-visualized 
by TTE and without branch vessel disease, surveil-
lance of the distal aorta and its branches is needed 
to evaluate for the possible interval occurrence of 
dilation (or dissection); the frequency of surveil-
lance imaging may be influenced by the patient’s 
age and family history.2
5. Cerebral aneurysms are described in 10% to 18% 
of patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 1,9,11,20 The 
frequency of follow-up screening for cerebral aneu-
rysm disease in patients without aneurysms on initial 
screening will depend on the patient’s age and may 
be informed by phenotype or other features.11
6.1.2.3.2. Medical Therapy in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
Recommendation for Medical Therapy in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendation
2a C-EO
1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, treat-
ment with a beta blocker or an ARB (unless 
contraindicated), or both, in maximally toler-
ated doses, is reasonable.
Synopsis
The management of individuals with Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome includes medical therapy, lifestyle modification, 
imaging surveillance, and surgical intervention. To lessen 
hemodynamic stress on the aorta, beta blockers are 
used.1 Based on studies of mouse models, ARBs have 
also been used.2
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There are no randomized trials of medications 
to reduce aortic growth or the risk of aortic dis-
section in patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 
Consequently, the approach to medical therapy is 
similar to that used for treating patients with Marfan 
syndrome, based on the similarities between the 
2 connective tissue disorders and on data from 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e369
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
mouse models of Loeys-Dietz syndrome.2 Thus, the 
use of beta blockers, ARBs, or both is reasonable.1
6.1.2.3.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Surgical 
Interventions: Replacement of the Aorta in Patients 
With Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
Recommendations for Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With 
Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome and 
aortic dilation, the surgical threshold for 
prophylactic aortic root and ascending aortic 
replacement should be informed by the spe-
cific genetic variant, aortic diameter, aortic 
growth rate, extra-aortic features, family his-
tory, patient age and sex, and physician and 
patient preferences (Table 11).1-9
2b C-EO
2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome attrib-
utable to a pathogenic variant in TGFBR1, 
TGFBR2, or SMAD3, surgery to replace 
the intact aortic arch, descending aorta, or 
abdominal aorta at a diameter of ≥4.5 cm 
may be considered, with the specific genetic 
variant, patient age, aortic growth rate, family 
history, presence of high-risk features (Table 
11), and surgical risk informing the decision.
Synopsis
In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, prophylactic aor-
tic root replacement for aneurysm disease prevents type 
A aortic dissection and improves outcomes. 1,2,10-12 Aortic 
dissection in Loeys-Dietz syndrome that is attributable to 
pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, and SMAD3 
may occur at smaller aortic diameters than in Marfan 
syndrome.1-3,13 Based on limited data, Loeys-Dietz syn-
drome attributable to pathogenic variants in TGFB2 5,6,14 
and TGFB38,9 may have a less aggressive aortic pheno-
type than disease attributable to TGFBR1, TGFBR2, or 
SMAD3 variants. 1,2,4,15,16 The size threshold for elective 
surgery to replace the dilated aortic root and ascending 
aorta in Loeys-Dietz syndrome depends on multiple fac-
tors and is informed by the specific pathogenic variant, 
phenotypic features, patient age, aortic growth rates, and 
family history (Table 11).1,2,10-12,17
There is little information about size thresholds for 
prophylactic surgery in Loeys-Dietz syndrome to lessen 
the risk of aortic dissection or rupture when there are 
intact aneurysms involving the aortic arch, descending, or 
abdominal aorta, or involving aortic branch vessels. 11,12,18 
After aortic dissection, progressive aneurysmal dilation 
commonly occurs and often requires multiple operative 
interventions.11,12,18
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, 
TGFB2, and TGFB3 lead to Loeys-Dietz syndrome 
or may cause aortopathy with few outward fea-
tures. Most information is available for TGFBR1 
and TGFBR2 pathogenic variants. 1,2 Patients 
with TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 variants are at risk 
of type A aortic dissection at younger ages and 
smaller aortic root diameters than in Marfan syn-
drome.1,17 ,19 This aggressive aortopathy, especially 
in those with severe craniofacial features, previ-
ously led to a recommendation for surgery at an 
aortic root diameter of >4.0 cm.1 The “2010 ACC/
AHA Guidelines for the Management of Thoracic 
Aortic Disease” recommended aortic surgery at a 
diameter between 4.2 cm and 4.6 cm, depending 
on imaging modality.20 SMAD3-related Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome variants may lead to aortic dissection at 
variable diameters.4,15,16,20 Aortic dissection risk is 
higher in women with TGFBR2 variants who have 
Table 11. Surgical Thresholds for Prophylactic Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic Replacement 
in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Based on Genetic Variant
CORL OE (references) Genetic Variant Presence of High-Risk Features* Aortic Diameter (cm)
1 C-LD2 TGFBR1 No /g1164.5
1 C-LD2 TGFBR2 No /g1164.5
2b C-EO2 TGFBR1 Yes /g1164.0
2a C-LD1,2 TGFBR2 Yes /g1164.0
2a C-EO13,16 SMAD3 – /g1164.5†
2b C-EO5-7 TGFB2‡ – /g1164.5†
2b C-EO9,23 TGFB3 – /g1165.0†
*Aortic surgery may be recommended at smaller aortic diameters in Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable to TGFBR1 and 
TGFBR2 pathogenic variants when there are features that associate with a higher risk of aortic dissection, including: certain 
speciﬁc pathogenic variants; women with TGFBR2 and small body size; severe extra-aortic features (ie, craniosynostosis, 
cleft palate, hypertelorism, biﬁd uvula, marked arterial tortuosity, widened scars, and translucent skin); family history of aortic 
dissection (especially at young age or relatively small aortic diameter); and aortic growth rate >0.3 cm/y.
†Family history, age, and aortic growth rate also inform surgical thresholds.
‡Pathogenic variants in the TGFB2 gene are different than variants in the TGFBR2 gene.
COR indicates class of recommendation; and LOE, level of evidence.
Colors correspond to COR and LOE in Table 2.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e370
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
certain extraaortic features.2 Limited data have not 
suggested higher aortic dissection risk at smaller 
aortic size in those with TGFB25,6,14 or TGFB3 vari-
ants.8,9 Marked intrafamilial variability exists for 
aortic disease in Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 17 ,21,22 A 
shared decision about timing of prophylactic sur-
gery to prevent type A aortic dissection in Loeys-
Dietz syndrome should include consideration of 
the specific genetic variant, aortic diameter, aor-
tic growth rate, age, sex, body size, family history, 
patient preferences, and surgical expertise.
2. Aneurysms of the distal ascending aorta, arch, 
descending aorta, and abdominal aorta may occur 
in Loeys-Dietz syndrome.1,2,5,8,9,11-14,16,17 At the time 
of aortic root replacement, the entire ascending 
aorta is also to be replaced because distal ascend-
ing aortic aneurysm and dissection may occur 
after isolated aortic root replacement. 10-12,19 There 
is little information about aortic size thresholds at 
which the risk of aortic dissection warrants elec-
tive surgery in the intact aortic arch, descending, 
or abdominal aorta in Loeys-Dietz syndrome. A 
shared decision should consider the pathogenic 
variant, aortic diameter, rate of aortic growth, age, 
sex, body size, patient preference, and the sur-
geon’s preference and surgical expertise. Aortic 
interventions in Loeys-Dietz syndrome are espe-
cially common after aortic dissection.10-12
6.1.2.4. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Imaging, 
Medical Therapy, and Surgical Intervention
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, affecting 1 in 50 000 
to 100 000 individuals, is attributable to pathogenic vari-
ants in COL3A1 and leads to spontaneous aortic and 
arterial dissections, aneurysms, and rupture at young 
ages.1,2 The onset and severity of arterial pathology cor-
relates with the specific COL3A1 pathogenic variant. 2 
Imaging the aorta and branches may identify arterial seg-
ments at risk, but the frequency of screening surveillance 
is uncertain.1-4 T ypical protocols include baseline MRI or 
CT from head to pelvis to evaluate the entire aorta and 
its branches, with annual surveillance imaging thereafter 
to monitor any dilated or dissected aortic or arterial seg-
ments and imaging every 2 years when the initial imaging 
is normal.1,2,5 Notably, the aorta and arterial branches in 
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome may rupture (or dis-
sect) even without significant dilation.1-3
Medical therapy of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
includes education, lifestyle modification, and avoidance 
of invasive procedures when possible.3,6 Studies of celip-
rolol, a beta blocker with vasodilatory properties, have sug-
gested a benefit in patients with vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome,7, 8 but data were considered to be insufficient for 
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. In the 
absence of data showing efficacy in vascular Ehlers-Dan-
los syndrome, other beta blockers are often prescribed, 
with some physicians choosing alternative beta blockers 
with vasodilatory properties. There are no studies showing 
a benefit of ARBs in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Surgical repair in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
carries an increased risk because of vascular fragility 
and associated bleeding complications. 1-3,5 Rapid arte-
rial aneurysm growth or the occurrence of dissection are 
indications for treatment,1-3,5 but no data are available to 
guide diameter thresholds for prophylactic surgical inter-
vention for aortic and arterial branch vessel aneurysms 
in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.1-5 Consequently, the 
decision to intervene for aortic and branch vessel aneu-
rysms and dissections involves a Multidisciplinary Aor-
tic Team and shared decision-making. 3,6 Open surgery 
requires meticulous technique to lessen vascular and 
tissue trauma, and interventional techniques may involve 
arterial embolization and endovascular therapy, depend-
ing on individual circumstances.1,3,5
Guidelines for management of pregnancy in vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome are limited, given the lack of data 
and the rarity of the condition.9 The decision to proceed with 
pregnancy in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is complex; 
for some women with specific genetic variants, null muta-
tions, and normal vascular imaging, the risk may be lower, 
but shared decision-making is essential.9 Of 38 women 
with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome completing 82 deliv-
eries, only 13% were aware of their diagnosis before preg-
nancy.9 Tissue fragility complicates labor and delivery and 
poses risks for vascular events and wound complications.9,10 
Complications may occur after vaginal or cesarean deliver-
ies, but most women known to have vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome undergo cesarean delivery.9-12
6.1.2.5. Turner Syndrome
Recommendations for Diagnostic Testing, Surveillance, and Surgical 
Intervention for Aortic Dilation in Turner Syndrome
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with Turner syndrome, TTE and 
cardiac MRI are recommended at the time of 
diagnosis to evaluate for BAV, aortic root and 
ascending aortic dilation, aortic coarctation, 
and other congenital heart defects.1-9
1 B-NR
2. In patients with Turner syndrome who are 
≥15 years old, the use of the ASI (ratio 
of aortic diameter [cm] to BSA [m 2]) is 
recommended to define the degree of 
aortic dilation and assess the risk of aortic 
 dissection.9,10,11
1 C-LD
3. In patients with Turner syndrome without risk 
factors for aortic dissection (Table 12), sur-
veillance imaging with TTE or MRI to evalu-
ate the aorta is recommended every 5 years 
in children and every 10 years in adults, as 
well as before planning a  pregnancy.9,10,11
1 C-EO
4. In patients with Turner syndrome and an ASI 
>2.3 cm/m2, surveillance imaging of the aorta 
is recommended at least  annually.9
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e371
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
1 C-EO
5. In patients with Turner syndrome and risk 
factors for aortic dissection (Table 12), surveil-
lance aortic imaging at an interval depending 
on the aortic diameter, ASI, and aortic growth 
rate is recommended ( Figure 18).9
2a C-LD
6. In patients with Turnery syndrome who are 
≥15 years old and have an ASI of ≥2.5 cm/m2 
plus risk factors for aortic dissection (Table 
12), surgical intervention to replace the aortic 
root, ascending aorta, or both is reasonable.9,10
2b C-EO
In those without risk factors for aortic  
dissection, surgical intervention to replace the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both may be 
considered.
Synopsis
Turner syndrome, which affects 1 in 2 500 liveborn girls, 
results from complete or partial loss of the second X 
chromosome in all or some of the cells of an individual.9,12 
Approximately 50% of patients with Turner syndrome have 
cardiovascular defects that include BAV (15%–30%), 
aortic coarctation (7%–18%), and ascending aortic dila-
tion (33%).9,12 Patients with Turner syndrome require car-
diac imaging to evaluate for congenital heart and aortic 
defects and to determine aortic diameters. Patients with 
Turner syndrome are at increased risk of aortic dissec-
tion, with 85% occurring in the ascending and 15% in 
the descending aorta.10,11,13 Risk factors for aortic dissec-
tion include aortic dilation, hypertension, BAV, and aortic 
coarctation.9-11,13 Because Turner syndrome patients are 
of short stature, type A aortic dissection may occur at 
relatively small aortic diameters; consequently, indexing 
the aortic diameter to body size (ie, calculating an ASI) is 
recommended in monitoring the aorta.9,12,14
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Turner syndrome may be recognized in infancy or 
childhood or, alternatively, go unrecognized until 
adolescence or adulthood. On the diagnosis of 
Turner syndrome, a TTE and cardiac MRI are per-
formed to evaluate for associated congenital car-
diovascular abnormalities (BAV, aortic coarctation, 
and others) and to measure aortic diameters.9,12
2. Because patients with Turner syndrome have short 
stature, using absolute aortic diameters alone may 
underestimate aortic dissection risk. 9-11,13 T ype A 
aortic dissection in Turner syndrome may occur at 
relatively small aortic diameters, likely reflecting the 
typical patient’s short stature, so indexing of aortic 
diameter to body size (by calculating the ASI) is 
performed when evaluating patients with Turner 
syndrome who are ≥15 years old.9,10 The ASI is cal-
culated by dividing the maximal aortic diameter, in 
centimeters, by the BSA, in meters squared. An ASI 
>2.0 cm/m2 is considered to be abnormal, and an 
ASI ≥2.5 cm/m 2 is associated with an increased 
risk of aortic disection. 9-11 Using a Turner syn-
drome-specific z-score to assess for aortic dilation 
is preferred in children <15 years old.
3. Lifelong surveillance imaging of the aorta is used 
to monitor for aortic dilation: For children with 
Turner syndrome and no additional risk factors for 
aortic dissection, reevaluation at 5-year intervals 
is appropriate; for adults with Turner syndrome 
and no additional risk factors for aortic dissec-
tion, surveillance imaging of the aorta with TTE or 
MRI every 10 years is appropriate. 9 Surveillance 
imaging should also be performed before planned 
pregnancy.9
4. In Turner syndrome, the risk of aortic dissection 
correlates with ASI, 9 and an ASI ≥2.5 cm/m 2 is 
associated with a significantly increased risk of 
aortic dissection. When the ASI approaches this 
threshold, more frequent surveillance imaging is 
appropriate to monitor aortic diameters.9
5. In Turner syndrome, risk factors for aortic dissec-
tion include aortic dilation, BAV, aortic coarctation, 
and hypertension. 9-11,13 When these risk factors 
are present, surveillance imaging of the aorta is 
performed more frequently. For the patients with 
Turner syndrome who are ≥15 years old and have a 
stable ASI of ≤2.3 cm/m2, surveillance imaging with 
TTE or MRI is performed every 2 to 3 years.9 In the 
patients with Turner syndrome who are >15 years 
old with an ASI >2.3 cm/m 2, at least annual sur-
veillance imaging of the aorta is appropriate. 9 The 
frequency of imaging should be informed by aortic 
diameter, aortic growth rate, severity of hyperten-
sion, and aortic valve function (Figure 18).9,12
6. In patients with Turner syndrome, diameter thresh-
olds for prophylactic surgical replacement of 
aneurysms of the aortic root/ascending aortic 
replacement are based on retrospective series 
and case studies.10,11,13 Data from registries of aor-
tic dissection in Turner syndrome report that the 
risk of dissection is significantly increased when 
the ASI is ≥2.5 cm/m 2.9-11,13 In addition to aortic 
size, risk factors for aortic dissection in Turner syn-
drome include BAV, aortic coarctation, and hyper-
tension.9,11,13 However, decisions using indexed 
calculations alone for aortic risk determination in 
Table 12. Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection in Patients With 
Turner Syndrome
Aortic coarctation
Aortic dilation
Bicuspid aortic valve
Hypertension
Recommendations for Diagnostic Testing, Surveillance, and Surgical 
Intervention for Aortic Dilation in Turner Syndrome (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e372
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
short-statured but obese patients with Turner syn-
drome or those with low body weight relative to 
height may be less accurate. In such Turner syn-
drome patients who are ≥15 years old, an absolute 
aortic diameter of >4.0 cm may be more accurate 
than ASI in determining the risk of aortic disection.9 
For patients with Turner syndrome who are <15 
years old, a Turner syndrome-specific z-score cal-
culation is appropriate to determine aortic risk and 
assess for surgical intervention.9,14 For patients with 
Turner syndrome without additional risk factors for 
aortic dissection, few data exist on the degree of 
aortic dilation that warrants surgical intervention.9
6.1.2.6. Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic Variants 
in ACTA2, PRKG1, MYH11, MYLK, and LOX: 
Recommendations for Surveillance of Aorta, Medical 
Therapy, and Aortic Surgical Intervention
Pathogenic variants in ACTA2, PRKG1, MYH11, MYLK, 
and LOX confer a highly penetrant risk for TAD that is 
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 1-4 In these 
nsHTADs, baseline imaging of the thoracic aorta with 
TTE, or with CT or MRI if the ascending aorta is not ade-
quately visualized by TTE, is recommended; surveillance 
imaging is then performed annually, if stable. The arch 
and descending aorta may dilate, in which case surveil-
lance imaging of these segments is also performed. Less 
frequent imaging may be considered when the aorta is 
normal, depending on gene variant, age, and family his-
tory. Beta-blocker therapy is used to lessen hemody-
namic stress on the aorta.
Specific features associated with each gene include: 
Patients with ACTA2 mutations primarily present with 
type A or B aortic dissection, have aneurysms that 
involve the root and ascending aorta, and a subset of 
pathogenic variants predispose to occlusive vascu-
lar diseases. 2,5-7 Screening for coronary artery disease 
and cerebrovascular disease is performed in individu-
als with specific pathogenic variants. 5,6,8,9 Patients with 
ACTA2 mutations can suffer type A aortic dissection at 
Figure 18. Suggested Aortic Monitoring Protocol for Girls and Women With Turner Syndrome Who Are ≥15 Years of Age.
*Surveillance frequency may vary depending on disease severity (ie, aortic valve dysfunction, severity of coarctation obstruction, hypertension, 
and left ventricular hypertrophy). Color corresponds to Class of Recommendations in Table 2. ASI indicates aortic size index; BAV, bicuspid aortic 
valve; CoA, coarctation of the aorta; HTN, hypertension; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; and TTE, transthoracic echocardiography. Modified 
from Silberbach et al.9 Copyright 2018, with permission from American Heart Association, Inc. Modified from Gravholt et al.12 Copyright 2017 , with 
permission from Bioscientifica Limited.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e373
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
aortic diameters <4.5 cm, and consideration of surgery 
at diameters <4.5 cm is informed by the presence of 
additional risk factors.10 PRKG1-related HTAD can pres-
ent in the late teens with type A or B aortic dissection 
without previous aortic enlargement 11-13; patients with 
MYH11 mutations primarily present with type A or B 
aortic dissection (type A aortic dissection may present at 
aortic diameters <5.0 cm), have aneurysms that involve 
the root and ascending aorta, and may have peripheral 
arterial disease4,14; patients with MYLK mutations pres-
ent at age >40 years with type A aortic dissection with 
little previous enlargement of the aorta (median aortic 
diameter, 4.25 cm) 3,15,16; patients with LOX mutations 
can present with aortic root aneurysms, fusiform dilation 
of the root and ascending aorta that can extend into the 
aortic arch, or type A aortic dissection, and they may 
have mild systemic features of Marfan syndrome. 1,17 ,18 
The decision regarding the timing of aortic repair in nsH-
TAD is based on the aortic diameter, age, family history, 
and the presence or absence of additional risk factors 
(Table 13).
6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy
Recommendations for BAV Aortopathy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with a BAV, TTE is indicated to 
evaluate valve morphology and function, to 
evaluate the diameter of the aortic root and 
ascending aorta, and to evaluate for aortic 
coarctation and other associated cardiovascu-
lar defects.1-4
1 C-LD
2. In patients with a BAV, CT or MRI of the tho-
racic aorta is indicated when the diameter and 
morphology of the aortic root, ascending aorta, 
or both cannot be assessed accurately or 
completely by TTE.1
1 C-LD
3. In patients with a BAV and either HTAD or 
phenotypic features concerning for Loeys-
Dietz syndrome, a medical genetics evaluation 
is recommended.5,6
1 C-LD
4. In patients with a BAV and a dilated aortic 
root or ascending aorta, screening of all first-
degree relatives by TTE is recommended to 
evaluate for the presence of a BAV, dilation 
of the aortic root and ascending aorta, or 
both; if the diameter and morphology of the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both cannot be 
assessed accurately or completely by TTE, a 
cardiac-gated CT or MRI of the thoracic aorta 
is indicated.7
2a B-NR
5. In patients with a BAV, screening of all first-
degree relatives by TTE is reasonable to 
evaluate for the presence of a BAV, dilation of 
the aortic root and ascending aorta, or  
both.7-10
Synopsis
BAV is a common congenital valve condition affecting 
approximately 1% of the population, with a 2 to 3:1 male-
to-female predominance.3 BAV most often occurs spo-
radically but may be inherited in an autosomal dominant 
pattern with variable penetrance. 5 A BAV may be iso-
lated or associated with other congenital cardiovascular 
defects or aortopathy conditions. 5 BAV is often associ-
ated with aortic valve dysfunction (stenosis or regurgita-
tion) and is at risk of infective endocarditis. Patients with a 
BAV often have aortic dilation or aneurysms affecting the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, with the prevalence 
of aortic aneurysm increasing with age. 11 Distinct aortic 
dilation phenotypes have been described. 1,12 Those with 
BAV and a dilated aorta are at risk for type A aortic dis-
section.11,13,14 Patients with BAV require lifelong surveil-
lance imaging of the aorta, even after AVR.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Aortic dilation in BAV may affect the aortic root, 
the ascending aorta, or both. The ascending aorta 
is most commonly involved, and the dilation some-
times extends up into the arch. 1-3 The prevalence 
Table 13. Surgical Thresholds for Prophylactic Aortic Root and Ascending Aortic Re-
placement in Nonsyndromic Heritable  Thoracic Aortic Disease Based on the Genetic 
Variant and Additional Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection
COR* LOE* Genetic Variant Risk FactorsA ortic Diameter (cm)
2a C-LD ACTA2 No /g1164.5
2b C-EO ACTA2 Yes† /g1164.2
2b C-LD PRKG1 No /g1164.2
2b C-EO PRKG1 Yes† /g1164.0†
*Patient has risk factors for aortic dissection (family history of type A aortic dissection with minimal aortic en-
largement, aortic growth rate /g1160.3 cm/y) or signiﬁcant valve disease requiring surgery.
†Earlier surgery may be considered in patients with a family history of type A aortic dissection in the setting of 
no or minimal aortic dilation, aortic growth rate /g1160.3 cm/y, or at the patient’s request.
Colors correspond to COR and LOE in Table 2.
COR indicates class of recommendation; and LOE, level of evidence.
Recommendations for BAV Aortopathy (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e374
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
of aortic dilation in BAV is reported from 20% to 
84%, depending on the population studied and 
the definition of aortic dilation. 3,12 Patients with 
BAV and aortic dilation are at risk for aortic dissec-
tion.3,11,13 The aortic root, ascending aorta, arch, and 
proximal descending aorta should be imaged by 
TTE to evaluate for aortic valve function, aortic dila-
tion, and aortic coarctation. 1-4 Conversely, in other 
patients undergoing TTE, a finding of unexplained 
aortic root, ascending aortic dilation, or both should 
prompt suspicion of an underlying BAV 15; if TTE 
of the aortic valve is inconclusive for BAV, cardiac 
magnetic resonance, cardiac CTA, and TEE can be 
used to better visualize the aortic valve and thereby 
diagnose BAV.
2. Cardiac-gated CT or MRI provides superior images 
of the aortic root and ascending aorta when TTE is 
inadequate to visualize the full extent of the proxi-
mal aorta. The choice between CT or MRI depends 
on patient characteristics, institutional expertise, 
renal function, affordability, and radiation exposure 
concerns.16
3. Certain types of HTAD have an increased preva-
lence of BAV. For example, BAV is present in ∼10% 
of patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attribut-
able to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, 
SMAD3, TGFB2, and TGFB3), 6 and HTAD attrib-
utable to pathogenic variants in NOTCH1, ACTA2, 
MAT2A, SMAD6, and LOX also have an increased 
prevalence of BAV.5,6 Importantly, most patients with 
BAV and TAAs who undergo genetic testing will 
not be found to have a pathologic genetic variant, 
even when their condition is familial. Nevertheless, 
when the condition is familial, a medical geneticist 
or specialist in genetic aortopathy should evaluate, 
counsel, and genetically test patients with BAV and 
aortopathy.17
4. Both BAV and aortic root and ascending aortic dila-
tion may be familial,7 and the inheritance patterns for 
familial BAV and aortopathy are consistent with an 
autosomal dominant pattern with incomplete pen-
etrance.8-10 In families with BAV and aortic root and 
ascending aortic dilation, obligate carriers may have 
BAV, aortic dilation, both, or neither.7 In families with 
BAV and aortic root and ascending aortic dilation, 
screening of the first-degree relatives (parents, sib-
lings, and children) with TTE to evaluate for BAV and 
aortic dilation identifies affected members. If a family 
member is discovered to have a BAV, aortic dilation, 
or both, cascade evaluation of other related family 
members is then indicated. Because families with 
BAV and aortic dilation may have members with aor-
tic root and ascending aortic dilation in the absence 
of a BAV, if the ascending aorta is not adequately 
assessed by TTE, a CT or MRI should be performed 
to fully evaluate the size of the ascending aorta.
5. The prevalence of a BAV in the relatives of a 
patient with a BAV ranges from 9% to 20%. 8-10 
Family members of individuals with a BAV may also 
have aortic dilation. A recent analysis found that 
TTE screening of first-degree relatives of affected 
patients, to detect both BAV and aortopathy, proves 
to be cost-effective.18
6.1.3.1. Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease Aortopathy
Recommendations for Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease Aortopathy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with a BAV who have undergone 
previous aortic valve repair or replacement 
and have a diameter of the aortic root, 
ascending aortic, or both of ≥4.0 cm, lifelong 
surveillance imaging of the aortic root and 
ascending aorta by TTE, CT, or MRI is recom-
mended at an interval dependent on aortic 
diameter and rate of growth.1-3
1 C-LD
2. In patients with a BAV and a diameter of the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both of ≥4.0 
cm, lifelong surveillance imaging of the aortic 
root and ascending aorta by TTE, CT, or MRI 
is recommended at an interval dependent on 
aortic diameter and rate of growth.4,5
Synopsis
Patients with BAV, with or without aortic dilation, require 
lifelong surveillance of the aortic root and ascending 
aorta because of risk of late aortic growth. The degree of 
aortic dilation and the progression of aortopathy may be 
greater in patients with aortic root phenotype and those 
with predominant AR. 3,6 Progressive aortic growth may 
occur after AVR.3,7
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients with BAV who have undergone previous 
isolated AVR or aortic valve repair remain at risk 
for future aortic dilation and dissection. In a series 
of 1 286 patients who underwent isolated AVR for 
BAV from 1960 to 1995, the 15-year freedom 
from aortic events (aortic dissection, aortic aneu-
rysm of >5.0 cm, or aortic aneurysm surgery) was 
89% but was lower for those with documented 
aortic dilation at baseline compared with those with 
normal diameters (85% versus 93%; P=0.001). 8 
Patients with BAV who have undergone isolated 
AVR for aortic stenosis and have only mild-to-mod-
erate aortic dilation are at low risk for adverse aor-
tic events at 15-year follow-up, 3,9 whereas those 
who underwent AVR for predominant AR and 
those with predominant dilation of the aortic root 
(“root phenotype”) are at higher risk for adverse 
aortic events during follow-up. Among 56 patients 
with BAV who underwent isolated AVR for AR and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e375
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
had concomitant aortic root dilation (4.0–5.0 cm), 
adverse aortic events occurred in 34% of patients 
during follow-up.4 Patients with BAV who undergo 
isolated AVR for AR are at higher risk for late aortic 
dissection than patients who underwent AVR for 
aortic stenosis.10
2. In a prospective study of 90 adults with BAV, the 
mean increase in ascending aortic diameter was 0.47 
mm/y (range, 0.2–2.3 mm/y) over a 4.8-year follow-
up.11 Surveillance imaging can document current aor-
tic diameters and permit calculation of aortic growth 
rates.2,6 Among a cohort of adult patients with BAV 
(mean age, 55±17 years) without a TAA at baseline 
(ie, the baseline aortic diameter was <4.5 cm), 13% 
went on to develop a TAA at 14±6 years after diag-
nosis, and the 25-year risk of TAA was 26%.12 For 
many adults, an aortic root, ascending aortic, or both 
diameter ≥4.0 cm is considered dilated and should 
therefore be monitored over time with surveillance 
imaging to detect progressive dilation.
6.1.3.2. BAV Aortopathy Interventions: Replacement of 
the Aorta in Patients With BAV
Recommendations for BAV Aortopathy Interventions: Replacement of 
the Aorta in Patients With BAV
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with a BAV and a diameter of 
the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both 
of ≥5.5 cm, surgery to replace the aortic 
root, ascending aorta, or both is recom-
mended. 1-3
2a B-NR
2. In patients with a BAV and a cross- sectional 
aortic root or ascending aortic area (cm2) to 
height (m) ratio of ≥10 cm2/m, surgery to 
replace the aortic root, ascending aorta, or 
both is reasonable, when performed by expe-
rienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic 
Team.3,4
2a B-NR
3. In patients with a BAV, a diameter of the aortic 
root or ascending aorta of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm, 
and an additional risk factor for aortic dissec-
tion (Table 14), surgery to replace the aortic 
root, ascending aorta, or both is reasonable, 
when performed by experienced surgeons in a 
Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.1,5
2a B-NR
4. In patients with a BAV who are undergoing 
surgical aortic valve repair or replacement, 
and who have a diameter of the aortic root 
or ascending aorta of ≥4.5 cm, concomitant 
replacement of the aortic root, ascending 
aorta, or both is reasonable, when performed 
by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.1,6
2b B-NR
5. In patients with a BAV, a diameter of the aortic 
root or ascending aorta of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm, 
no other risk factors for aortic dissection 
(Table 14), and at low surgical risk, surgery 
to replace the aortic root, ascending aorta, or 
both may be reasonable, when performed by 
experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.1,2,5
Synopsis
The timing of surgery to replace the aorta in BAV disease 
depends on the morphology and diameter of the aorta, 
aortic valve function, rate of aortic growth, family history, 
patient characteristics, patient wishes, and the expertise 
of the surgeon and institution.1,7
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients with a BAV without significant aortic dila-
tion are at low risk for type A aortic dissection, 3,8 
whereas those patients with BAV and aneurysmal 
dilation of the aortic root, ascending aorta, or both 
have a significantly increased risk of aortic dis-
section.5,8 The risk of aortic dissection rises with 
increasing aortic diameter, and there are “hinge 
points” when the ascending aorta reaches diam-
eters >5.25 cm to 5.75 cm.9
2. Indexing the maximal aortic root or ascending aortic 
diameter to height is predictive of aortic dissection 
risk and therefore informs surgical thresholds. 3,4 
Moreover, when comparing long-term outcomes 
in patients with BAV and aortic root or ascending 
aortic dilation, survival was significantly better for 
those with an aortic cross-sectional area (in cm 2) 
to height (in meters) ratio of ≥10 who underwent 
elective prophylactic aortic repair compared with 
those who did not undergo elective repair.3
3. There are additional risk factors for aortic dissec-
tion that may inform aortic surgical thresholds in 
patients with a BAV. A family history of aortic dis-
section10 and rapid aortic growth of ≥0.3 cm/y 
(when measured similarly with same technique) are 
both risk factors for aortic dissection. Patients with 
BAV and aortic coarctation have been reported to 
be at increased risk of aortic dissection,11 although 
in a recent report of 499 patients with BAV (mean 
age, 40±16 years), of whom 24% also had aortic 
coarctation, there was no difference in adverse aor-
tic events between those with or without coarcta-
tion.12 Patients with dilation of the aortic root (“root 
phenotype”) represent 10% to 20% of patients 
with BAV and aortopathy and may have more rapid 
aortic growth and an increased risk of aortic com-
plications.13,14 Because surgical aortic root replace-
ment (and VSRR) is more complex than ascending 
aortic replacement, shared decision-making is 
often used when evaluating the risks and benefits 
Table 14. Risk Factors for Aortic Dissection
Family history of aortic dissection
Aortic growth rate /g1160.3 cm/y
Aortic coarctation
“Root phenotype” aortopathy
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e376
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
of elective aortic root replacement at aortic diam-
eters <5.5 cm.1,2,5,6
4. In patients with a BAV and indications for aortic 
valve intervention for stenosis or regurgitation, 
the data are limited regarding the degree of aor-
tic dilation that warrants replacement of the aortic 
root, ascending aorta, or both at the time of AVR. 
Patients with a long life expectancy, low surgical 
risk, or with the root phenotype and predominant 
AR may benefit from concomitant prophylactic aor-
tic repair. Conversely, for patients at higher surgi-
cal risk, especially those with aortic stenosis and 
only moderate ascending aortic dilation, the risks 
of concomitant aortic repair may not be warranted.
5. Limited data are available on the risk of aortic 
dissection among those with a BAV and aortic 
aneurysm diameter of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm.5,15 Patient-
related characteristics and surgical expertise may 
inform the timing of surgery, especially in low-risk 
patients with BAV and aortic aneurysms of 5.0 cm 
to 5.4 cm.1,2,5,6
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening
Recommendations for AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-R
1. In men who are ≥65 years of age who have 
ever smoked, ultrasound screening for 
detection of AAA is recommended.1
1 C-LD
2. In men or women who are ≥65 years of 
age and who are first-degree relatives of 
patients with AAA, ultrasound screening for 
detection of AAA is recommended.2,3
2a C-EO
3. In women who are ≥65 years of age who 
have ever smoked, ultrasound screening for 
detection of AAA is reasonable.4,5
2b C-LD
4. In men or women <65 years of age and 
who have multiple risk factors (Table 15) or 
a first-degree relative with AAA, ultrasound 
screening for AAA may be considered.5,6
3: No 
 Benefit B-NR
5. In asymptomatic men or women >75 years 
who have had a negative initial ultrasound 
screen, repeat screening for detection of 
AAA is not recommended.1
Synopsis
Although AAA share risk factors with typical athero-
sclerosis, AAA are histopathologically distinct and char-
acterized by medial degeneration of the aortic wall. 7 
Most AAA develop an intraluminal thrombus that con-
tributes to ongoing wall degradation via oxidative stress, 
smooth muscle cell apoptosis, proteolysis of the extra-
cellular matrix, and adventitial inflammation. 8 A complex 
interplay of hereditary and environmental risk factors 
contributes to AAA, most notably older age, male sex, 
smoking, and a positive family history (Table 15). 2,3,9-12 
Lifetime risk for AAA is 8.2% in men and 10.5% in cur-
rent smokers. 11 At least 10% to 25% of patients with 
AAA have a family member with the same condition, 2 
and AAA may occur concomitantly with thoracic aortic 
aneurysmal disease, especially in some genetic aortop-
athies.11 Inflammatory aortitis is a rare cause of AAA13,14 
(see Section 9.1, “Inflammatory Aortitis – Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and Giant Cell Arteritis 
(GCA)”). The growth of AAA is nonlinear, with a mean 
rate of 2.6 mm/y for AAA <5.0 cm, 15 and may accel-
erate in the setting of smoking or a family history of 
AAA,16,17 and smoking may have a greater impact on 
growth in women than in men. 4 Ultrasound screening 
should be targeted toward those at the greatest risk for 
AAA and growth (Figure 19), with the goal of prevent-
ing rupture and associated mortality. 1,5,6
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Older age, male sex, and smoking are independent, 
strong risk factors for the development of AAA.9-11 
Smoking history is defined as lifetime use of ≥100 
cigarettes, but risk attributable to smoking varies 
significantly depending on use, with lowest risk of 
AAA in those who have lower versus higher pack-
year history. 9 Based on a meta-analysis of ran-
domized clinical trials inclusive of nearly 125 000 
mostly male patients, screening of men ≥65 years 
of age reduced long-term AAA-related mortal-
ity (4 RCTs: OR, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.57–0.74) and 
AAA-related ruptures (4 RCTs: OR, 0.62; 95% CI, 
0.55–0.70) over 12 to 15 years. 1 In a recent pop-
ulation-based study (of both men and women) in 
the United Kingdom, two-thirds of the acute AAA 
events occurred in those ≥75 years of age; con-
sequently, screening to elderly patients should be 
offered, provided they would benefit from potential 
aortic repair.18
2. Having a first-degree relative with AAA is a 
well-known and well-established risk factor for 
development of AAA. 2,3 Small cohort studies of 
ultrasound screening in relatives of those with 
AAA have identified an overall prevalence of new 
AAA of 10% to 20%, with the highest prevalence 
of 25% found among brothers. Indeed, the overall 
Table 15. Risk Factors for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm
Strong Risk Factors Additional Risk Factors
Smoking history Hypertension
Older age Hyperlipidemia
Male sexW hite race
Family history of abdominal aortic 
aneurysm
Inherited vascular connective 
tissue disorder
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e377
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
lifetime prevalence of AAA is estimated to be 32% 
in brothers of those with AAA, 2 suggesting the 
need for a targeted and individualized screening 
approach for those who already meet age criteria 
within families.
3. Select women may be at risk for AAA and related 
complications.5 Randomized trials and large obser-
vational studies that evaluate outcomes of screen-
ing for AAA by ultrasound in women are lacking, 
as female sex has not been proven an indepen-
dent risk factor for AAA, 11 and overall prevalence 
of AAA in women is lower than in men. However, 
the risk of AAA may be potentiated by smoking in 
women; in 1 study, smoking was associated with a 
15-fold increased risk of AAA among women (rel-
ative risk, 15.0; 95% CI, 13.2–17 .0) versus 7-fold 
among men (relative risk, 7 .3; 95% CI, 6.4–8.2). 4 
Practical implementation and outcomes of screen-
ing in women remain uncertain and warrant further 
study.
4. Select patients <65 years of age may be at 
increased risk of AAA rupture, and data suggest 
a significant proportion of those undergoing repair 
for ruptured AAA did not meet the standard criteria 
for screening based on age.5,6 In a large study from 
the National Inpatient Sample, 10 603 of 25 777 
patients with ruptured AAA (24%) were <65 years 
of age. 5 Notably, in patients <65 years, data are 
lacking on the mortality benefit of AAA screening.
5. Some patients may develop AAA after the age 
of 75 years even if they had an initial negative 
screen between the ages of 65 and 75 years. 
Although somewhat limited, data from cohort stud-
ies suggest long-term AAA-related mortality is low 
among patients with an initial negative screening 
ultrasound who had a subsequent AAA detected 
on repeat screening after the age of 75 years. 1 
However, select patients at low surgical risk who 
may have had borderline enlarged abdominal aorta 
measurements on initial screening and who have 
significant AAA risk factors (Table 15) may be con-
sidered for repeat screening on an individualized 
basis.
6.3. Growth and Natural History of Aortic 
Aneurysms
Aortic aneurysm growth and natural history is variable 
and dependent on the underlying etiology, such as HTAD 
(eg, Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome), BAV, 
or sporadic aortic disease without a known genetic basis. 
There is significant evidence that aortic diameter cor-
relates with aortic dissection, aortic rupture, and mortal-
ity.1-3 In patients with Marfan syndrome, the mean rate 
Figure 19. Algorithm for Identifying Patients to Screen for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm.
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendations in Table 2. AAA indicates abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e378
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
of growth of the aortic root has been reported to be 
0.26 cm/y (range, 0.13–0.35 cm/y), with a tendency for 
larger aneurysms (>6.0 cm) to grow faster (0.46 cm/y).4 
Patients with BAV have a slower rate of aortic growth, with 
a root predominant phenotype growing at 0.06 cm/y (0.6 
mm/y) and the more common ascending aortic pheno-
type at 0.03 cm/y (0.3 mm/y). 5 Moreover, among those 
with tricuspid aortic valves and sporadic ascending aortic 
dilation, the mean rate of growth is even slower, as low as 
0.01 cm/y (0.1 mm/y).6 Aortic arch aneurysm growth has 
been reported to be 0.25 cm/y. 7 The mean growth rate 
of descending and TAAA has been reported to be 0.19 
cm/y, with rates increasing as the diameter increases. 8 
The mean rate of growth of AAA is 0.26 cm/y, with larger 
aneurysms growing as fast as 0.5 cm/y.9
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic and 
Degenerative Aortic Aneurysm Disease
The primary goals of medical therapy in sporadic and 
degenerative thoracic and abdominal aneurysmal dis-
ease are to reduce growth rates, the risk of aortic-related 
mortality, and the need for aortic repair; a secondary goal 
is to decrease the risk of nonaortic cardiovascular events, 
given the multiple shared risk factors between aneurys-
mal and atherosclerotic disease.1,2 Lifestyle modification, 
including smoking cessation and blood pressure (BP) 
control, improves overall cardiovascular health and may 
be beneficial to patients with aortic aneurysmal disease. 
Pharmacotherapy specific to the treatment of aortic 
disease includes the use of selected antihypertensives 
(especially beta blockers and ARBs) that may mitigate 
the proteolysis pathways, leading to medial degenera-
tion and reducing of sheer stress on the aortic wall, as 
well as the use of statins, which may target inflammatory 
and atherosclerotic pathways.3 Outcomes data from clini-
cal trials of medical therapy in aortic aneurysms broadly 
are limited, as most trials have focused on cohorts of 
patients with either Marfan syndrome or AAA. Conse-
quently, correlations may be imprecise when applied to 
other populations.
6.4.1. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor Modification 
in Sporadic TAA
6.4.1.1. BP Management in Sporadic TAA
Recommendations for BP Management in TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with TAA and an average systolic 
BP (SBP) of ≥130 mm Hg or an average 
diastolic BP (DBP) of ≥80 mm Hg, the use of 
antihypertensive medications is recommended 
to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.1-3
2a C-LD
2. In patients with TAA, regardless of cause and 
in the absence of contraindications, use of 
beta blockers to achieve target BP goals is 
reasonable.1,4,5
2a C-EO
3. In patients with TAA, regardless of etiology 
and in the absence of contraindications, 
ARB therapy is a reasonable adjunct to beta-
blocker therapy to achieve target BP goals.6
Synopsis
The goal of BP control in TAA is to slow growth and 
prevent aortic dissection, as well as to reduce nonaor-
tic cardiovascular events, such as myocardial infarction 
and stroke. Uncontrolled hypertension increases the risk 
for aortic dissection,7 so achieving a SBP goal of ≤130 
mm Hg and a DBP goal of ≤80 mm Hg, with the use of 
antihypertensive therapy in those with hypertension and 
TAA, is advised. Although data are limited, achieving a 
more intensive SBP goal of <120 mm Hg, if tolerated, 
may have added benefit in selected patients and who 
are not undergoing surgical repair.4 There has been sig-
nificant progress in understanding the molecular basis of 
aneurysmal development and growth, 8 and a number of 
clinical trials have explored the effects of beta-blocker 
and ARB therapy. 9 A summary of these trials specific 
to genetic aortopathies is covered in detail in Section 
6.1.2, “Genetic Aortopathies.” However, as the molecular 
mechanisms of aneurysm formation may have similari-
ties between aneurysm patients with and without Marfan 
syndrome, data from these studies may be extrapolated 
in guiding the treatment of aortic disease of other causes. 
Further clinical trials are clearly needed.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. No randomized clinical trials have evaluated the 
optimal threshold to which BP should be lowered 
in patients with TAA to reduce the risk of aortic 
complications (aortic growth, aortic dissection, 
or aortic rupture). Updated hypertension guide-
lines from the ACC and AHA suggest all patients 
with clinical cardiovascular disease should have a 
target SBP <130 mm Hg, DBP <80 mm Hg, or 
both.1 Evidence supports aggressive BP lower-
ing to reduce vascular-related adverse events and 
all-cause mortality.2,3 Data from SPRINT (Systolic 
Blood Pressure Intervention Trial) showed that 
intensive BP control to a SBP <120 mm Hg, if 
tolerated, reduced cardiovascular events by 25% 
and all-cause mortality rate by 27% in patients 
without diabetes over a median of 3.3 years, com-
pared with a control with a SBP target of <140 
mm Hg.10,11
Recommendations for BP Management in TAA (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e379
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
2. Prospective data on the positive effects of beta 
blockers in TAA based on cause are limited, with 
the most robust evidence derived from cohort 
studies of those with Marfan syndrome (see 
Section 6.1.2.2, “Marfan Syndrome”). In a small, 
open-label, randomized clinical trial of prophylac-
tic propranolol (mean dose, 212±68 mg/d) versus 
placebo in adolescents and adults with Marfan 
syndrome, beta-adrenergic blocking drugs slowed 
aortic root growth and reduced aortic complica-
tions.5 In a study of 155 children <12 years of age 
with Marfan syndrome, beta blockers decreased 
the rate of aortic root growth by 0.16 mm/y, on 
multivariate analysis. 4 In the “2017 Hypertension 
Clinical Practice Guideline,” beta-blocker therapy is 
the recommended first-line antihypertensive drug 
therapy for patients with hypertension and TAD.1
3. A meta-analysis of 1 510 randomized patients 
evaluating the effect of ARBs on TAA associated 
with Marfan syndrome showed slower growth of 
the aortic root with the use of ARBs compared with 
placebo; in a direct comparison with beta-blocker 
therapy, there was no difference in aortic growth; 
and the combination of beta blocker plus ARB led 
to slower aortic growth than beta blockers alone. 6 
In the Jikei Heart Study,12 which supported the use 
of ARBs in the 2010 ACC/AHA thoracic aortic 
disease guidelines, Japanese patients on an anti-
hypertensive drug regimen that included valsartan 
had a lower rate of adverse cardiovascular events, 
including mortality and, in particular, a reduction 
was showed in the incidence of aortic dissection. 
However, this study was subsequently retracted 13 
and, consequently, the LOE for use of ARBs has 
been downgraded to C from B.
6.4.1.2. Treatment of TAA With Statins
Recommendations for Treatment of TAA With Statins
COR LOE Recommendations
2a C-LD
1. In patients with TAA and imaging or clinical 
evidence of atherosclerosis, statin therapy at 
moderate or high intensity is  reasonable.1,2
2b C-LD
2. In patients with TAA who have no evidence of 
atherosclerosis, the use of statin therapy may 
be considered.3-6
Synopsis
Clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) 
encompasses aortic aneurysms of atherosclerotic ori-
gin. For the purpose of this guideline, we also define 
aortic aneurysm with concomitant PAU or visualized 
atheroma as atheromatous aortic disease, even in the 
presence of a genetic syndrome, given some causes 
have shared risk factors with ASCVD. Based on the 
AHA/ACC “2018 Guideline on the Management of 
Blood Cholesterol,” 1 a high-intensity statin for >50% 
reduction in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) for patients 
<75 years of age with clinical atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease was recommended to prevent adverse 
events (eg, myocardial infarction and stroke). If a high-
intensity statin cannot be used, a moderate-intensity 
statin can be initiated. 1 According to evidence from 
animal studies in nonatherosclerotic-related TAA, statin 
therapy may prevent growth and adverse remodeling. 7 
However, its use in clinical practice at this time is not 
fully understood.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Atherosclerotic aortic aneurysms increase risk 
of stroke and myocardial infarction and thus are 
considered a coronary artery disease equivalent 
according to NCEP ATP III (National Cholesterol 
Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III), with 
a >20% risk of an event within 10 years. 8 The 
“2016 AHA/ACC Guideline on the Management 
of Patients With Lower Extremity Peripheral Artery 
Disease”9 gave a COR 2a recommendation for use 
of high-intensity statin in patients with noncoronary 
atherosclerotic disease to achieve an LDL goal 
of <70 mg/dL. From the Cholesterol Treatment 
Trialists’ Collaboration, when combining data from 
5 RCTs of 39 612 patients over median 5.1 years, 
more intensive cholesterol lowering in patients with 
ASCVD reduced major cardiovascular events by an 
additional 15% beyond what was achieved with 
less intensive cholesterol lowering. 1,2 In patients 
with sporadic or genetically mediated aneurysms, if 
there is concomitant atherosclerotic disease else-
where, then statin therapy is still reasonable.
2. It has long been hypothesized that the pleiotropic 
effects of statins may be beneficial in preventing 
the adverse vascular wall remodeling associated 
with TAAs, thereby slowing growth, regardless of 
cause and whether associated atherosclerosis is 
present. Animal studies have shown a reduction in 
thoracic aneurysm growth with statin therapy, possi-
bly via regulation of MMP activity.7 ,10 A study of 1348 
patients with thoracic aortic ectasia showed, in a 
propensity-matched analysis, a possible benefit with 
statin therapy in the reduction of aortic growth rate 
as well as aortic complications.3,11 In a retrospective 
study that included 2267 patients who underwent 
TEVAR for aneurysmal disease, 1148 (64%) of 
whom had been treated with a statin preoperatively, 
preoperative statin therapy was associated with sig-
nificantly lower perioperative complication rates and 
5-year mortality.12 A possible benefit of statins in 
prevention of adverse aortic-related outcomes was 
also showed in a small cohort study, and slowing 
of aortic growth is suggested by 2 small studies in 
patients with BAV and aortopathy.6,8
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e380
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
6.4.1.3. Smoking Cessation in TAA
Recommendation for Smoking Cessation in TAA
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-LD 1. In patients with TAA who smoke cigarettes, 
smoking cessation efforts are recommended.1,2
Synopsis
Smoking cessation and avoidance of secondhand smoke 
exposure is considered a healthy lifestyle modification in 
patients with TAAs, regardless of cause. Many patients 
cared for in cardiovascular clinical practices have interest 
in smoking cessation; thus, implementation of an effec-
tive strategy using the 5 A’s (Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, 
and Arrange) is worthwhile, along with a referral to dedi-
cated programs, use of app-based tools, pharmacother-
apy (which includes nicotine replacement, bupropion, or 
varenicline), or both. 1-3 Although the use of e-cigarettes 
has been shown to be an effective strategy in smoking 
cessation,4 the efficacy and, importantly, safety of e-cig-
arette use in patients with TAA is not well understood.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There are many validated options for smoking ces-
sation for patients who continue to smoke and 
have TAA.1-3 Although no randomized clinical trials 
have evaluated the effect of smoking cessation on 
outcomes in TAA, smoking is a risk factor for TAA 
expansion and, among those with atherosclerotic 
aortic disease, smoking cessation reduces the rates 
of myocardial infarction and death. 5,6 The use of 
e-cigarettes, although an effective smoking cessa-
tion tool, has not been shown to be safe when used 
in patients with vascular disease, including TAA; fur-
ther, small studies suggest that the flavoring chemi-
cals in e-cigarettes may have an adverse effect 
on vascular endothelial function and relaxation via 
nitric oxide and cyclic guanosine monophosphate-
mediated signaling.7, 8
6.4.1.4. Antiplatelet Therapy in TAA
Recommendation for Antiplatelet Therapy in TAA
COR LOE Recommendation
2a C-EO
1. In patients with atherosclerotic TAA and con-
comitant aortic atheroma or PAU, the use of 
low-dose aspirin is reasonable, unless contra-
indicated.1,2
Synopsis
Aortic aneurysms of atherosclerotic origin are consid-
ered a coronary artery disease equivalent according to 
the NCEP ATP III, with a >20% risk of an event within 
10 years.3 The 2006 updated “AHA/ACC Guidelines for 
Secondary Prevention for Patients With Coronary and 
Other Atherosclerotic Vascular Disease” 1 recommend 
use of low-dose aspirin (75–162 mg/d) in patients with 
atherosclerotic aortic disease. Even in the absence of 
TAA, this remains true in other atherosclerotic aortic dis-
eases, such as high-grade atheroma, PAU, or both.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In the SPARC (Stroke Prevention: Assessment of 
Risk in a Community) study, aortic atherosclerosis 
was associated with coronary artery disease (OR, 
2.99; 95% CI, 1.47–6.10; P=0.003).2 In turn, in 
the presence of coronary artery disease, aspirin 
has long been recommended to reduce the risk 
of cardiovascular events, including stroke, death 
caused by coronary artery disease, and myocardial 
infarction.1
6.4.2. Medical Therapy and Risk Factor Modification 
in AAA
6.4.2.1. BP Management in AAA
Recommendation for BP Management in AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendation
1 B-NR
1. In patients with AAA and an average SBP of 
≥130 mm Hg, or an average DBP of ≥80 mm 
Hg, the use of antihypertensive medication is 
recommended to reduce risk of cardiovascular 
events.1-3
Synopsis
Reducing cardiovascular events such as myocardial 
infarction and stroke, as well as preventing aneurysm 
growth and rupture, are the main goals in antihyper-
tensive therapy in AAA. Uncontrolled hypertension is a 
known risk factor for aortic rupture and dissection; there-
fore, achieving an SBP goal of <130 mm Hg, and a DBP 
goal of <80 mm Hg with the use of antihypertensive 
therapy in those with hypertension and AAA can reduce 
adverse clinical outcomes, and some patients may ben-
efit from more intensive lowering with an SBP goal of 
<120 mm Hg.4 The most robust evidence of antihyper-
tensive therapy in AAA is for beta blockers and agents 
that alter the renin angiotensin system; however, in pro-
spective clinical trials in humans, no specific agent has 
been proven to inhibit AAA growth.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Updated hypertension guidelines from the ACC 
and AHA suggest all patients with clinical cardio-
vascular disease have a target SBP of <130 mm 
Hg and/or DBP <80 mm Hg. 1 Evidence supports 
aggressive BP lowering to reduce vascular-related 
adverse events and all-cause mortality. 2,3 A more 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e381
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
intensive SBP goal of <120 mm Hg, if tolerated, 
may have added benefit in select patients without 
diabetes and who are not undergoing surgical aor-
tic repair. However, data are limited to the single 
randomized SPRINT,4 which showed that intensive 
BP control to SBP <120 mm Hg reduced cardio-
vascular events by 25% and all-cause mortality by 
27% in patients without diabetes over a median of 
3.3 years, compared with a control with an SBP tar-
get of <140 mm Hg.4,5
6.4.2.2. Treatment of AAA With Statins
Recommendations for Treatment of AAA With Statins
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with AAA and evidence of aortic 
atherosclerosis, statin therapy at moderate or 
high intensity is recommended.1-3
2b C-LD
2. In patients with AAA but no evidence of 
atherosclerosis, statin therapy may be 
 considered.4,5
Synopsis
ASCVD includes noncoronary atherosclerotic disease 
such as peripheral artery disease (PAD) and AAA. 6 For 
the purpose of this guideline, we define abdominal AAA 
of atherosclerotic cause as those with visualized aortic 
wall atheroma, penetrating aortic ulceration either within 
the aneurysm or at another site along the aorta, or both, 
with a limitation being that many patients with geneti-
cally mediated AAA (see Section 6.2, “AAA: Cause, Risk 
Factors and Screening”) may have concomitant ASCVD. 
The AHA/ACC “2018 Guideline on the Management of 
Blood Cholesterol,”9 using evidence from the Cholesterol 
Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, recommended a high-
intensity statin or, in some cases, moderate-intensity, for 
patients with clinical ASCVD. A 50% reduction in LDL 
for such patients <75 years of age can prevent adverse 
events, such as myocardial infarction and stroke.7 Ongo-
ing study is needed to evaluate clinical outcomes of 
statin therapy in patients with nonatherosclerotic AAA.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. AAA of atherosclerotic cause is considered a 
coronary artery disease equivalent, with a >20% 
risk of a cardiovascular event within 10 years. 8 
Intensive cholesterol lowering in patients with 
ASCVD reduces major cardiovascular events by 
an additional 15% beyond what is achieved with 
less intensive cholesterol lowering. 7, 9 From a large 
Danish case-control study, current, but not a his-
tory of previous, statin use was associated with 
decreased 30-day mortality rates in patients with 
ruptured AAA (46.1% versus 59.3%, respec-
tively; adjusted mortality rate, 0.80; 95% CI, 0.68–
0.95).10 Retrospective data from 5 892 patients 
enrolled in the EUROSTAR (EUROpean collabo-
rators on Stent-graft Techniques for abdominal 
aortic Aneurysm Repair) registry showed improved 
survival over 5 years of follow-up associated with 
statin use (81% for statin users versus 77% for 
nonusers; P=0.005).11 Additionally, in a large reg-
istry-based study of 37 950 patients undergoing 
repair of AAAs, those not previously on statin ther-
apy who were started on statin before discharge 
had improved 1- and 5-year survival compared with 
those who remained off statin therapy.12
2. In a recent meta-analysis, in broad cohorts of 
patients with AAA, statin therapy was associ-
ated with slower aneurysm growth, reduced risk 
of rupture, and lower 30-day mortality after aor-
tic repair 4; because atherosclerosis is so preva-
lent among patients with AAA, it was not possible 
to distinguish whether statin therapy benefited 
those without atherosclerosis equally. The mech-
anisms by which statins improve survival in AAA 
warrant further study, as in 1 single prospective 
cohort study of patients undergoing long-term 
surveillance, statins had not been shown to slow 
the growth rate of AAA or have direct effect 
on matrix metalloproteinase-9 or interleukin-6 
concentrations. 5
6.4.2.3. Smoking Cessation in AAA
Recommendation for Smoking Cessation in AAA
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-LD
1. In patients with AAA who smoke cigarettes, 
smoking cessation efforts are recom-
mended.1-4
Synopsis
Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor for the develop-
ment, growth, and complications of AAA (see Section 6.2, 
“AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening”) and increases 
the risk for adverse clinical outcomes in the perioperative 
setting for AAA repair. Healthy lifestyle modifications in 
ASCVD, such as atherosclerotic AAA and PAU, include 
smoking cessation and avoidance of secondhand smoke. 
Effective strategies in those patients motivated to quit 
smoking use the 5 A’s (Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, and 
Arrange) and may include dedicated multidisciplinary pro-
grams, app-based tools, or pharmacotherapy with nicotine 
replacement, bupropion, varenicline, or all 3. 1-3 Although 
e-cigarette use has been shown to be an effective strat-
egy in smoking cessation,4 the efficacy and safety of its 
use in patients with AAA has not been shown.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e382
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. No randomized clinical trials have assessed the 
effect of smoking cessation on clinical outcomes in 
patients with AAA, given the inherent design limi-
tations of such an intervention. Current guidelines 
and recommendations that encourage counseling 
and pharmacological interventions in patients moti-
vated to quit are derived from the fact that cigarette 
smoking is considered the largest modifiable risk 
factor for AAA. The use of e-cigarettes is effective 
in smoking cessation; however, given its association 
with adverse vascular remodeling, more evidence 
on its safety in patients with AAA is needed.
6.4.2.4. Antithrombotic Therapy in AAA
Recommendation for Antithrombotic Therapy in AAA
COR LOE Recommendation
2b C-LD
1. In patients with AAA with concomitant ather-
oma and/or PAU, the use of low-dose aspirin 
may be considered, unless contraindicated.1
Synopsis
Atherosclerotic AAA are associated with a >20% risk of 
cardiovascular events within 10 years, as they are con-
sidered a coronary artery disease equivalent according 
to the NCEP ATP III. 2 To reduce risk of cardiovascular 
events and mortality, aspirin at 75 mg to 162 mg daily 
for secondary prevention has been incorporated into the 
2006 updated “AHA/ACC Guidelines for Secondary 
Prevention for Patients With Coronary and Other Athero-
sclerotic Vascular Disease.”3 Most AAA contain an intra-
luminal thrombus (see Section 6.2, “AAA: Cause, Risk 
Factors, and Screening”) made up of a complex matrix 
of platelets, inflammatory cells, and fibrin, which contrib-
utes to growth and progression, and thus antithrombotic 
therapy has been hypothesized to have a potential ben-
efit in AAA. However, clinical outcomes data are limited, 
and further study of the efficacy of antiplatelet therapy in 
AAA is warranted.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Low-dose aspirin monotherapy in patients with 
noncoronary atherosclerosis is considered a treat-
ment to mitigate risk of cardiovascular events, 
including stroke, death caused by coronary artery 
disease, and myocardial infarction. 3 Data are lim-
ited on aortic-specific clinical outcomes in AAA. 
Use of low-dose aspirin has been hypothesized 
to reduce growth and progression of AAA attrib-
utable to the detrimental effects of platelet acti-
vation within the intraluminal thrombus. In 1 small 
cohort study, low-dose aspirin was associated with 
a reduced AAA growth rate and need for aneurysm 
repair at diameters of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm but not for 
aneurysms <4.0 cm. However, evidence from the 
Danish National Registry of Patients study of 4010 
age- and sex-matched subjects with AAA1 showed 
an increased case-fatality rate associated with 
preadmission aspirin use in ruptured AAA (66% 
in users versus 57% in nonusers; adjusted mor-
tality rate ratio, 1.16; 95% CI, 1.06–1.27); there 
was no association between aspirin use and the 
risk of AAA rupture (adjusted OR, 0.97; 95% CI, 
0.86–1.08).
6.4.3. Surveillance for Medical Management
6.4.3.1. Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation and 
Aneurysm
Recommendations for Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation and 
Aneurysm
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, a 
TTE is recommended at the time of diag-
nosis to assess aortic valve anatomy, aortic 
valve function, and thoracic aortic diam-
eters.1-4
2a C-LD
2. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, a CT 
or MRI at the time of diagnosis is reasonable 
to assess thoracic aortic anatomy and diam-
eters.1,3,5-7
2a C-LD
3. In patients with a dilated thoracic aorta, 
follow-up imaging (with TTE, CT, or MRI, as 
appropriate based on individual anatomy) in 
6 to 12 months is reasonable to determine 
the rate of aortic enlargement; if stable, 
surveillance imaging every 6 to 24 months 
(depending on aortic diameter) is reason-
able.1,3,4
Synopsis
In patients with TAD, a detailed baseline assessment of 
all the segments of thoracic aorta, aortic valve anatomy, 
and aortic valve function is important. TTE, CT, and MRI 
are all commonly used for assessment of the thoracic 
aorta.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with TAD not at surgical threshold, a 
detailed assessment with a TTE to evaluate aortic 
valve anatomy and aortic valve function is impor-
tant for establishing a baseline. TTE usually pro-
vides clear images of the aortic root and ascending 
aorta, is safe and reproducible, and can be used for 
longitudinal surveillance. In select patients with dif-
ficult echocardiographic imaging windows, a TEE 
is an alternative for evaluating aortic valve anatomy 
and aortic dimensions.1-3
2. Cross-sectional imaging with CT or MRI has been 
established as the gold standard for assessment 
of all segments of thoracic aorta including arch 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e383
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
branch vessels. 5,6 Electrocardiographic-gated 
techniques minimize motion artifact and thus allow 
precise measurement of aortic root and ascending 
aortic dimensions.5,6
3. Patients with stable aortic dimensions can be 
observed longitudinally with TTE, CT, or MRI. The 
frequency of surveillance imaging should be indi-
vidualized and informed by the aneurysm cause, 
aortic diameter, historical rate of aortic growth, how 
close the diameter is to the surgical threshold, and 
the patient’s age.8,9 In general, in patients with non-
genetic and syndromic causes, the rate of aortic 
growth is relatively slow, so the interval for surveil-
lance imaging may be increased.
6.4.3.2. Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dilation and 
Aneurysm
Recommendations for Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dilation and 
Aneurysm
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with an AAA of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cm, 
surveillance ultrasound is  recommended 
every 3 years to assess for interval 
change.1-8
1 B-NR
2. In men with an AAA of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm 
and in women with an AAA of 4.0 cm to 4.4 
cm, surveillance ultrasound is recommended 
annually to assess for interval change.1-8
1 B-NR
3. In men with an AAA of ≥5.0 cm and women 
with an AAA of ≥4.5 cm, surveillance ultra-
sound is recommended every 6 months to 
assess for interval change.1-8
1 C-EO
4. In patients with an AAA that is inadequately 
defined with ultrasound, surveillance CT is 
recommended.
2a C-LD
In such patients, when there is a contraindica-
tion to CT or to lower cumulative radiation risk, 
surveillance MRI is reasonable.9,10
1 C-EO
5. In patients with an AAA that meets criteria for 
repair, CT is recommended for preoperative 
planning.
Synopsis
In patients with AAA, imaging assessment of the abdom-
inal aorta is important for establishing baseline diameter 
and determining the timing of surveillance imaging. Ultra-
sound imaging has been the standard for surveillance 
imaging of the abdominal aorta and is widely used. CT 
provides superior visualization of the abdominal aorta 
and its branches and is therefore used for preopera-
tive planning. MRI is a reasonable alternative to CT in 
selected patients. Figure 20 shows a proposed general 
algorithm for surveillance imaging of AAA, recognizing 
that surveillance intervals should be individualized.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Multiple studies have established that ultrasound 
surveillance of AAAs helps to prevent rupture and 
mortality.2-7 ,11 The risk of rupture increases at an 
AAA diameter of >5.5 cm for men and >5.0 cm for 
women; accordingly, surveillance imaging should 
be more frequent at larger AAA diameters that 
approach these thresholds. Conversely, at AAA 
diameters of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cm, longer surveillance 
imaging intervals have been shown to be safe.
2. In patients with AAA of 4.0 cm to 4.9 cm, rates 
of aortic growth are higher, so annual surveillance 
ultrasound is recommended. Even shorter intervals 
are often used in those who smoke, have diabetes, 
or both because of their increased risk of growth.
3. Once the size of the AAA reaches ≥5.0 cm in men 
and ≥4.5 cm in women, the screening interval is 
shortened to every 6 months given the potential of 
larger aneurysms to grow more rapidly and reach 
the thresholds for intervention. CT provides superior 
visualization of the abdominal aorta and its branches 
and is an excellent alternative when ultrasound is 
inadequate. MRA is a reasonable alternative to CT. 
Non-IV contrast MRI techniques have also been 
shown to be useful in defining AAAs.9,10
Figure 20. The 
Frequency of 
Surveillance Imaging 
of Abdominal Aortic 
Aneurysms Based on 
Current Aortic Diameter.
Color corresponds to Class 
of Recommendations in 
Table 2.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e384
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
4. CT is generally preferred when an AAA reaches 
the threshold for intervention, both to confirm aor-
tic diameters and to detail the anatomy of the aorta 
and its branches for preoperative planning.
6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management of 
Aortic Aneurysms
Most patients with TAA and AAA are asymptomatic, so 
the purpose of surgical or endovascular intervention is 
to reduce the risk of adverse aortic events (ie, aortic dis-
section, rupture, and aortic-related death). Consequently, 
determining the optimal timing of intervention requires a 
careful anatomic assessment, followed by weighing the 
risk of future adverse aortic events against the risk of 
intervention.The goal of open surgery is to replace the 
aneurysmal aortic segment with a prosthetic graft anas-
tomosed to nonaneurysmal aortic tissues while maintain-
ing critical aortic branch vessels. Endovascular repair 
leverages contiguous nonaneurysmal aortic or iliac seg-
ments for fixation of endovascular stent grafts to exclude 
blood flow from the aneurysmal sac. To date, the FDA 
has approved individual stent grafts for the treatment of 
aneurysms involving the descending thoracic, juxtarenal, 
and infrarenal aortic segments. Stent graft devices to 
address the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and thoracoab-
dominal aorta are available under investigational use in 
the United States, currently in physician- and industry-
sponsored clinical trials. Long-term studies have shown 
that use of endovascular stent grafts outside of the ana-
tomic criteria tested in their pivotal trials is associated 
with increased risk of aneurysm sac enlargement, under-
scoring the need for appropriate patient selection and for 
long-term surveillance after endovascular repair.1
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic 
Root and Ascending Aorta
Recommendations for Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic 
Root and Ascending Aorta
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with aneurysms of the aortic root 
and ascending aorta who have symptoms attrib-
utable to the aneurysm, surgery is  indicated.1,2
1 B-NR
2. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of the 
aortic root or ascending aorta who have a maxi-
mum diameter of ≥5.5 cm, surgery is indicated.3-9
1 C-LD
3. In patients with an aneurysm of the aortic root 
or ascending aorta of <5.5 cm, whose growth 
rate confirmed by tomographic imaging is 
≥0.3 cm/y in 2 consecutive years, or ≥0.5 cm 
in 1 year, surgery is  indicated.10-13
2a B-NR
4. In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of 
the aortic root or ascending aorta who have 
a maximum diameter of ≥5.0 cm, surgery is 
reasonable when performed by experienced 
surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team.14-17
2a B-NR
5. In patients undergoing repair or replace-
ment of a tricuspid aortic valve who have 
a concomitant aneurysm of the ascending 
aorta with a maximum diameter of ≥ 4.5 cm, 
ascending aortic replacement is reasonable 
when performed by experienced surgeons in 
a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team. 18-21
2a B-NR
In patients undergoing repair or replacement 
of a tricuspid aortic valve who have a concom-
itant aneurysm of the ascending aorta with 
a maximum diameter of ≥5.0 cm, ascending 
aortic replacement is  reasonable.18-21
2b C-LD
 In patients undergoing cardiac surgery for 
indications other than aortic valve repair 
or replacement who have a concomitant 
aneurysm of ascending aorta with a maxi-
mum diameter of ≥5.0 cm, ascending aortic 
replacement may be reasonable.18
2a C-LD
6. In patients with a height >1 standard devia-
tion above or below the mean who have an 
asymptomatic aneurysm of the aortic root 
or ascending aorta and a maximal cross-
sectional aortic area/height ratio of ≥10 
cm2/m, surgery is reasonable when performed 
by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.14,15,22
2b C-LD
7 . In asymptomatic patients with aneurysms of 
the aortic root or ascending aorta who have 
either an ASI of ≥3.08 cm/m2 or AHI of ≥3.21 
cm/m, surgery may be reasonable when per-
formed by experienced surgeons in a Multidis-
ciplinary Aortic Team.23
Synopsis
Elective surgery for aneurysms of the aortic root and 
ascending aorta is ideally performed when the risk of 
adverse events—dissection, rupture, or sudden death—
outweighs the risks of surgery. No prospective multi-
center observational studies have evaluated the myriad 
of parameters (eg, aortic diameter, length, or area, alone 
or indexed to height or BSA, wall stress, shear stress) 
proposed for predicting the risk of aortic adverse events. 
From a purely mechanical perspective, aortic dissection 
or rupture can be considered a failure event, where an 
imbalance exists between stresses on the aneurysm wall 
and the inherent strength of its tissue.24 Whether the aor-
tic dissection is precipitated by increased wall stress or 
decreased wall strength, or a combination of both, is an 
area of active research.25-29 Maximal aortic diameter has 
logically been the primary criterion for elective aneurysm 
repair because, per LaPlace’s law, wall stress increases 
proportionally with aortic radius and inversely to thick-
ness.30 The original natural history studies examined 
the risk of rupture or aortic dissection versus diameter 
and the hinge point for dissection generated the 5.5-
cm threshold that has long governed clinical practice. 7, 8 
Although a significant proportion of patients with type 
A aortic dissection present with diameters <5.5 cm, 31,32 
Recommendations for Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic 
Root and Ascending Aorta (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e385
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
this surgical threshold still effectively reduces adverse 
events.17 ,33
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Large aneurysms can compress nearby structures 
as they expand, resulting in symptoms of chest or 
back pain. Alternatively, pain is sometimes associ-
ated with rapid aortic growth. Consequently, the 
appearance of such symptoms raises concern for 
an increased risk of aneurysm rupture,1,2 and surgi-
cal repair is therefore indicated.
2. A maximum aortic diameter of ≥5.5 cm has been 
the primary criterion for elective surgical repair of 
aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending thoracic 
aorta,4,6 based on natural history studies that exam-
ined diameter (without centerline analysis) at the 
time of adverse event and an assumed operative 
mortality of <5%.4,7-9 The mortality rate for elective 
surgery is low, whereas the risk of adverse events 
is high when such surgery is recommended but not 
performed because of patient noncompliance or 
comorbidities.33 The same 5.5-cm diameter thresh-
old applies regardless of whether patients have tri-
cuspid or BAVs.5
3. One meta-analysis and limited observational stud-
ies have found ascending aortic aneurysm growth 
to be slower than previously reported, and fre-
quently <0.5 mm/y, in patients with a tricuspid 
aortic valve and without a genetic aortic disor-
der.11,12,17 ,34 The meta-analysis suggested that rapid 
aneurysm growth is associated with an increased 
risk of rupture. 12 Because of the inherent error in 
measurement as well as interobserver variability, 
1 mm to 2 mm growth per year would be difficult 
to document consistently on surveillance imaging. 
Discrepancies in measurement can occur when 
comparing different imaging modalities or even 
when using the same modality when comparing 
images obtained with and without contrast. Ideally, 
growth rates are most accurate when assessed 
using cardiac-gated CT or MRI with centerline 
measurement techniques. 35 Confirmed growth 
of ≥0.5 cm in 1 year has been, and remains, an 
indication for surgery.3-6 Moreover, growth of even 
0.3 cm in 1 year still substantially exceeds the 
expected growth rate for aneurysms of the root 
and ascending aorta, so if that rate of growth rate 
is sustained for 2 consecutive years, intervention is 
also recommended.13
4. The risk of aortic dissection or rupture correlates 
with increasing aneurysm diameter,7 ,8,16 as does the 
rate of aortic growth. 12,36 As such, aneurysms of 
≥5.0 cm would be expected to have a greater risk 
of complications or rapid growth than would smaller 
aneurysms. Indeed, in a report by Paruchuri et al,37 
relative to a control aortic diameter of ≤3.4 cm, a 
diameter of 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm conferred an 89-fold 
increased risk of aortic dissection, and a diameter 
of ≥4.5 cm conferred a 6300-fold increased risk 
(Figure 5). Consequently, many experienced sur-
geons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team choose to 
operate selectively on patients with aneurysms of 
5.0 cm to 5.4 cm, 17 provided the patient’s surgical 
risk is low,38 and they have had excellent results14-16 
in doing so. However, there is an ongoing prospec-
tive multicenter RCT of patients with ascending 
TAAs of 5.0 cm to 5.4 cm that will compare out-
comes of early elective surgery vs. medical surveil-
lance,39 the results of which could provide further 
guidance.
5. For patients undergoing aortic valve surgery with 
concomitant ascending aortic aneurysm of ≥4.5 
cm, guidelines have previously recommended 
simultaneous aortic replacement in those with BAV. 
On the other hand, in patients who have undergone 
valve surgery without concomitant aortic aneurysm 
surgery, whether for an underlying bicuspid or tri-
cuspid aortic valve, the associated aneurysms have 
been shown to grow slowly and have low rates 
of aortic complications over time. Still, data have 
also shown the safety of performing concomitant 
aneurysm repair at a diameter of ≥4.5 cm by expe-
rienced surgeons working in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.16,18-21,40-43 Nevertheless, until there are 
better predictors for aortic complications, in general 
it is reasonable in patients undergoing aortic valve 
repair or replacement to offer concomitant aneu-
rysm surgery for those with aneurysms of ≥5.0 cm, 
because of the faster rate of growth and higher 
risk of aortic dissection. Aortic root replacement 
should be individualized based on the type of aortic 
valve surgery (ie, valve repair with or without valve-
sparing root versus valve replacement, mechani-
cal versus bioprosthetic root replacement), patient 
condition, patient age, and comorbidities. In those 
undergoing cardiac surgery for indications other 
than aortic valve repair, concomitant prophylactic 
aortic replacement at a diameter of 5.0 cm may be 
reasonable, because it would provide a margin of 
safety against future aortic dissection, particularly 
because cardiac surgery itself becomes an addi-
tional risk factor for subsequent aortic dissection.
6. Data from the IRAD showed that ∼60% of patients 
with acute type A aortic dissection had maximal 
aortic diameters of <5.5 cm 32 at presentation, a 
finding that has been corroborated by others. 31,44 
Conversely, most patients with aneurysms <5.5 
cm who are managed medically do not suffer aor-
tic dissection or rupture. Therefore, absolute aor-
tic diameter is far from an ideal predictor of risk. 
Parameters proposed to improve risk prediction 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e386
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
include the ratio of aortic diameter to either patient 
height or BSA,23 the ratio of aortic area to height,14,15 
the ascending aortic length (centerline, from annu-
lus to innominate artery takeoff), 14,15,45-47 aortic 
stiffness, and peak aortic wall stress. 25,48-50 All are 
retrospectively promising, but none has been pro-
spectively validated. A cross-sectional aortic area 
to patient height ratio of ≥10 cm2/m was found to 
correlate with increased mortality among unoper-
ated patients with root or ascending aortic aneu-
rysms and either a tricuspid 15 or BAV. 14 The use 
of the cross-sectional aortic area to height ratio is 
most appropriate in patients whose height is >1 
standard deviation above or below the mean.
7 . A single-center large database of TAA has grown 
considerably and was reevaluated with indexing 
of aortic diameter to BSA (ASI) or height (AHI), to 
improve the prediction of adverse aortic events. 23 
Height was preferred because the variable nature 
of weight and the underlying genetic contribu-
tion to height. Recommendations for prophylactic 
repair at aortic diameters of <5.5 cm have been 
proposed but not systematically tested in large-
scale multicenter trials. Experienced surgeons in 
a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team38 may consider the 
use of such ratios when determining the optimal 
timing of intervention. This may be particular useful 
for female patients, but more studies are required to 
further evaluate surgical thresholds in women with 
aneurysms of the aortic root or ascending aorta.
6.5.1.1. Surgical Approach for Patients With Sporadic 
Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta 
Meeting Criteria for Surgery
Recommendations for Surgical Approach for Patients With Sporadic 
Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta Meeting Criteria for 
Surgery
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with an aneurysm isolated to the 
ascending aorta who meet criteria for surgery, 
aneurysm resection and replacement with an 
interposition graft should be performed.1,2
1 B-NR
2. In patients undergoing aortic valve repair or 
replacement with a concomitant ascending 
aortic aneurysm, a separate aortic valve inter-
vention and ascending aortic graft is recom-
mended.3-6
1 B-NR
3. In patients undergoing aortic root replace-
ment with an aortic valve that is unsuitable for 
sparing or repair, a mechanical or biological 
valved conduit aortic root replacement is indi-
cated.1,2,7 ,8
2a B-NR
4. In patients undergoing aortic root replace-
ment, valve-sparing aortic root replacement 
is reasonable if the aortic valve is suitable 
for sparing or repair and when performed by 
experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.9-21
Synopsis
The goal of prophylactic repair of aneurysms of the aortic 
root and ascending aorta is to prevent life-threatening 
complications from acute aortic events such as aortic dis-
section, aortic rupture, or sudden death. This goal is best 
achieved when the risk of future adverse aortic events is 
greater than the expected surgical mortality (considering 
both the surgeon’s and institutional experience). The STS 
database has clearly shown that proximal thoracic aortic 
surgery has a lower operative mortality when performed 
electively rather than emergently (2.2% versus 17 .2%, 
respectively).1
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Proximal thoracic aortic operations in the United 
States, including ascending thoracic aortic replace-
ment and aortic root replacement, have an over-
all elective mortality rate of 2.2%. Consequently, 
patients who meet criteria for aneurysm repair and 
have low operative risk can undergo prophylactic 
resection and graft placement with low operative 
mortality risk.1 Similar results were obtained when 
examining the Nationwide Inpatient Sample in 
which operative mortality rate for proximal thoracic 
aortic surgery was 2.5%.2
2. Single-institution studies have shown that the 
addition of ascending TAA repair to AVR does not 
increase operative mortality in experienced aor-
tic centers.22-24 However, such results may not be 
reproducible at low-volume centers that have a 
higher operative mortality rate for isolated proximal 
thoracic aortic surgery. 1,2 Root-sparing AVR with 
concomitant ascending aneurysm repair is accept-
able, because data suggest the aortic root dilates 
at a slower rate than does the ascending aorta, 
and studies of root-sparing surgery have shown no 
increase in long-term adverse aortic events.3-6,25
3. Surgical approaches to replace the aortic root 
should be guided by the aortic valve anatomy. If the 
aortic valve is unsuitable for sparing or repair (eg, 
large fenestrations, calcification), a mechanical- or 
biological-valved conduit aortic root replacement 
should be performed because, when elective, 
this procedure has an operative mortality rate of 
2.2% in the United States based on the STS data-
base.2,26 Single-institution series from centers with 
Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams have also shown 
excellent results both with and without concomi-
tant hemiarch replacement. 7 Long-term outcomes 
are similar with mechanical- versus biological-
valved conduit aortic root replacements, even in 
patients <70 years old.8
4. In younger patients with an aortic valve that is ame-
nable to sparing or repair, elective valve-sparing 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e387
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
aortic root replacement has been performed safely 
by experienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary 
Aortic Team.9-11,21 In patients with aortic root aneu-
rysms without an underlying genetic disorder, 
valve-sparing aortic root replacement has been 
performed by either the reimplantation or remodel-
ing technique with comparable survival and valve 
durability.12
6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms
Recommendations for Aortic Arch Aneurysms
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. In patients with an aortic arch aneurysm 
who have symptoms attributable to the 
aneurysm and are at low or intermediate 
operative risk, open surgical replacement is 
recommended.
2a B-NR
2. In patients with an isolated aortic arch 
aneurysm who are asymptomatic and have 
a low operative risk, open surgical replace-
ment at an arch diameter of ≥ 5.5 cm is 
 reasonable.1-3
2a C-LD
3. In patients undergoing open surgical repair of 
an ascending aortic aneurysm, if the aneurys-
mal disease extends into the proximal aortic 
arch, it is reasonable to extend the repair with 
a hemiarch replacement.4,5
2b C-LD
4. In patients undergoing open surgical repair 
of an aortic arch aneurysm, if the aneurysmal 
disease extends into the proximal descending 
thoracic aorta, an elephant trunk procedure 
may be considered.6,7
2b C-EO
5. In patients with an aortic arch aneurysm who 
are asymptomatic but meet criteria for inter-
vention, but have a high risk from open surgi-
cal repair, a hybrid or endovascular approach 
may be reasonable.
Synopsis
Aortic arch aneurysms are the least common of the TAA, 
because <10% of aneurysms involve the arch only; in 
most cases, arch aneurysms are associated with adja-
cent pathology.1 Previous aortic dissection is the most 
common cause of arch aneurysms; in a large meta-
analysis, only 28.3% of patients undergoing intervention 
on the arch had de novo aneurysmal disease, with the 
remainder resulting from acute or chronic aortic dissec-
tion. The risk of dissection or rupture, as related to aor-
tic diameter, is presumed to be similar in the arch as in 
other thoracic locations, although no large reports con-
sider arch dimensions alone. Additionally, because of the 
proximity of the aortic arch to other thoracic structures, 
dilation may result in symptoms before the diameter 
reaches a threshold typically considered for intervention. 
Intervention to treat arch aneurysms carries an increased 
risk given the need to manage the great vessels and 
protect the brain. Various techniques have been devel-
oped, including the use of hypothermic circulatory arrest 
and specialized branched grafts to aid in reconstruction. 
Endovascular techniques also continue to evolve.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Because of the juxtaposition of the aortic arch to 
other vascular structures, nerves, trachea, and the 
esophagus, symptoms may develop because of the 
mass effect from encroachment on adjoining struc-
tures. Ortner’s syndrome is unilateral hoarseness 
secondary to inflammation or stretching of the left 
recurrent laryngeal nerve. 8 Dysphagia aortica can 
be caused by extrinsic compression of the esopha-
gus by either fusiform or saccular aneurysms of 
the arch. Likewise, extrinsic compression of the 
trachea may result in dyspnea, and compression 
of the innominate vein or superior vena cava may 
cause superior vena cava syndrome. Nonspecific 
symptoms include chest pain or pressure, fatigue, 
and neck, jaw, or back pain.
2. Open replacement of the aortic arch requires the 
use of cardiopulmonary bypass, hypothermia, and 
other adjuncts for neurologic and systemic pro-
tection. Various randomized and nonrandomized 
trials have compared different cannulation strate-
gies (ie, axillary, femoral, innominate), 9-12 levels of 
hypothermia, and variations in cerebral perfusion 
(antegrade, select antegrade, retrograde),13-15 with 
no one technique dominating or being shown con-
clusively to be superior to another.
3. When proximal aneurysmal aortic disease extends 
to the level of the innominate artery or further into 
the arch, but not necessarily the whole arch, a hemi-
arch procedure may be able to effectively address 
the distal pathology. Open distal anastomosis will 
require the same adjuncts and approaches used in 
open arch replacement (as described previously), 
including neuroprotective strategies. Modified 
approaches have been described that eliminate 
the need for open repair whereby the ascending 
aorta is replaced first with a trifurcated side-branch 
for debranching of the arch in a sequential manner 
to a level that is accessible for clamping; however, 
no studies have yet shown the benefit of such an 
approach. Although it does add to the cardiopulmo-
nary bypass time and blood loss,4,5 the addition of a 
hemiarch has been shown not to increase the risk 
of the procedure. However, this noninferiority is lost 
when the proximal arch is disease free, with excep-
tion of an underlying aortopathy in which the nor-
mal-sized arch will predictively enlarge or dissect at 
a later time; in this setting, a hemiarch is justified.16,17
4. The elephant trunk procedure, as originally 
described, extends the aortic arch graft into the 
proximal descending aorta, thereby facilitating the 
subsequent repair of diseased descending thoracic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e388
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
aorta (by either open repair or TEVAR). 18 Either a 
traditional elephant trunk (an extension graft anas-
tomosed to the distal end of an aortic arch graft at 
the time of arch repair that projects into the proximal 
descending aorta with a free distal end) or a frozen 
elephant trunk (a combined open aortic arch graft 
with an extension endovascular stent-graft extend-
ing into the descending thoracic aorta to treat 
extensive TAD involving both arch and descending 
segments via a median sternotomy) can be used.6,19 
With adjunctive procedures (ie, debranching), the 
distal anastomosis can be moved more proximally 
into aortic zones 2 or 3 (Figure 3), while still pro-
ceeding with an elephant trunk and with the poten-
tial of decreasing morbidity, but data are limited 
on the benefits of moving the anastomotic site. A 
qualifying factor for considering open versus frozen 
elephant trunk is whether the primary distal seal will 
be achieved with the frozen elephant trunk. In the 
absence of a distal seal, the conventional approach 
would provide the same considerations for the sec-
ond-stage procedure.
5. Various hybrid and endovascular techniques have 
been developed to address the aneurysmal arch in 
the setting of a high-risk patient, including open 
extra-anatomical bypasses (eg, left carotid-to-
left subclavian artery bypass) and endovascular 
approaches. The Next-gen Fenestrated TEVAR 
trial showed the feasibility of proximal landing 
zone coverage, with most endografts being placed 
in zones 0 or 1 (Figure 3), although a landing zone 
of <15 mm was associated with an increased risk 
of a type I endoleak (Figure 11). 20 The midterm 
follow-up showed 5-year survival of 71% with an 
aneurysm-related event-free survival of 77%. The 
most frequent reason for reoperation was type Ia 
endoleak (5%).21 Nonrandomized comparisons of 
open versus hybrid endovascular approaches have 
not shown significant differences in outcomes.22-24 
Complete endovascular approaches have been 
described25,26 and may be considered by those 
with endovascular experience who have access to 
the appropriate devices, investigational devices, or 
both.
6.5.3. Descending TAA
6.5.3.1. Size Thresholds for Repair of Descending TAA
Recommendations for Size Thresholds for Repair of Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with intact descending TAA, 
repair is recommended when the diameter is 
≥5.5 cm.1,2
2b B-NR
2. In patients with intact descending TAA 
and risk factors for rupture (Table 17), 
repair may be considered at a diameter of 
<5.5 cm. 2-6
2b B-NR
3. In patients at increased risk for perioperative 
morbidity and mortality (Table 18), it may be 
reasonable to increase the size threshold for 
surgery accordingly.7
Synopsis
The current aortic size threshold for repair of descend-
ing TAA is primarily based on single-center series where 
patients have been observed with surveillance imag-
ing and clinical follow-up to determine the incidence of 
aortic-related events and deaths. Such series indicate 
that a descending aortic diameter of >6 cm is associ-
ated with an increased risk of adverse aortic events 
and mortality,1,2 as shown in Table 16. Moreover, certain 
patient and aneurysm features are associated with an 
increased risk for aortic dissection or rupture, as shown 
in Table 17 , which may prompt consideration of earlier 
surgery. Conversely, some patients are at increased risk 
of perioperative morbidity or mortality, in which case 
the size threshold for aortic repair might be increased. 
Specifically, if the patient does not have ideal anatomy 
for endovascular repair, or has otherwise increased risk 
for contemplated open repair, close monitoring until 
a higher surgical threshold is reached would be justi-
fied. Advanced age, 8 preoperative renal insufficiency or 
Table 16. Adverse Aortic Events at 1 Year, Based on Base-
line Aortic Diameter, Among Patients With Descending TAA
Aortic Diameter 
(cm)
Deﬁnite Aortic 
Event* (%)
Probable Aortic 
Event† (%)
5.0 5.5 8.0
5.5 7.2 11.2
6.0 9.3 15.6
7.0 15.4 28.1
*Deﬁnite aortic event includes aortic dissection or rupture conﬁrmed with 
imaging or intraoperative ﬁndings.
†Probable aortic event includes deﬁnite aortic events as well as sudden 
unexplained death.
TAA indicates thoracic aortic aneurysm. Based on data from Kim JB, et al.1
Table 17. Risk Factors for Aortic Rupture Among Patients 
With Descending TAA
High-Risk Features for Rupture
Aneurysm growth of /g1160.5 cm/y3
Symptomatic aneurysm4
Marfan, Loeys-Dietz, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or HTAD (see 
Section 6.1.2, “Genetic Aortopathies”)2
Saccular aneurysm5
Female sex2
Infectious aneurysm6
HTAD indicates heritable thoracic aortic disease; and TAA, thoracic aortic 
aneurysm.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e389
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
hemodialysis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
and previous stroke are harbingers of adverse outcomes 
or perioperative mortality after open repair (Table 18). 9 
Markers of frailty, pulmonary disease, thoracoabdominal 
extent, need for iliac access, and zone 1/2 deployment 
were associated with major adverse events after TEVAR 
(Table 18).7 A nuanced approach and detailed discus-
sion with the patient can help guide the most reason-
able treatment plan, weighing the risks of the operation 
against the risks of continued surveillance.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There is an increased incidence of aortic-related 
events such as rupture or dissection with aortic 
diameters >6 cm, justifying intervention when the 
diameter is ≥5.5 cm in size.1,2
2. High-risk features of rupture have been previously 
identified, supporting repair at a smaller diameter 
threshold when these criteria are met. Features 
including rapid aortic growth (≥0.5 cm/y), 3 symp-
tomatic aneurysms, 4 underlying connective tissue 
disorder or HTAD, 2 saccular aneurysm morphol-
ogy,5 female sex,2 and infected aneurysm6 have all 
been associated with a higher tendency for rupture.
3. In patients being considered for open or endovas-
cular repair, high-risk clinical features (Table 18) 
have been identified that portend poor outcomes 
after repair. For open surgical repair, advanced 
age,8 preoperative renal insufficiency of stage 3 
or greater, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
and forced expiratory volume in 1 second ≤50% 
predicted, and previous stroke 9 have all been 
associated with increased risk of death, periop-
erative morbidity, or both. For endovascular repair 
of descending TAA, frailty indicators, pulmonary 
disease, as well as procedural complexity are 
predictive of poor outcomes after TEVAR. 7 When 
contemplating either approach, special attention 
to these risk factors will allow appropriate consid-
eration of the risks to benefits in deciding on the 
merits of intervention.
6.5.3.2. Endovascular Versus Open Repair of 
Descending TAA
Recommendations for Endovascular Versus Open Repair of 
Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients without Marfan syndrome, Loeys-
Dietz syndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, who have a descending TAA that 
meets criteria for intervention and anatomy 
suitable for endovascular repair, TEVAR is 
recommended over open  surgery.1-4
1 B-NR
2. In patients with a descending TAA that meets 
criteria for repair with TEVAR, who have 
smaller or diseased access vessels, consid-
erations for alternative vascular access are 
recommended.5
2a B-NR
3. In patients with a descending TAA that meets 
criteria for intervention, who have anatomy 
unsuitable for endovascular repair, and who 
are without significant comorbidities and have 
a life expectancy of at least 10 years, open 
surgical repair is reasonable.6-9
Synopsis
Although no RCTs comparing TEVAR with open repair 
of descending TAA exist, the pivotal device trials 1,3,10 
have shown a reduced perioperative morbidity, increased 
clinical utility, and reduced follow-up aneurysm-related 
mortality compared with open surgical repair. However, 
reintervention after TEVAR is substantial. 11 In addition, 
although clinical device trials showed improved periop-
erative and long-term outcomes with TEVAR, Medicare 
claims data show that the perioperative advantage was 
lost within the first year after intact aneurysm repair, 
with a 5-year survival that was significantly worse after 
TEVAR versus open repair, at 79% versus 89%, respec-
tively (P<0.0001).4 Further study should be dedicated to 
understanding why the benefit from endovascular repair 
decays over time. In patients with connective tissue dis-
orders or HTAD, or those with a longer life expectancy, 
open surgical repair is reasonable. Open surgical repair 
of descending TAA reflects a volume-outcomes relation-
ship: Although large institutional series have shown good 
outcomes with open repair,6-9 these results are not repli-
cable at lower volume centers.12 The decision to proceed 
with endovascular versus open repair balances the need 
for appropriate anatomy and access, as well as a higher 
reintervention rate for TEVAR versus the higher periop-
erative risk associated with more definitive open surgical 
repair.
Table 18. Patient Characteristics Associated With Increased 
Perioperative Morbidity and Mortality After Open and Endo-
vascular Repair of Descending TAA
Open Surgical Repair Endovascular Repair
Advanced age8 Functional dependence
65–74 y (OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.4–2.4; 
P <0.001)
/g11675 y (OR, 2.6; 95% CI, 2.0–3.5; 
P <0.001)
Preoperative renal insufﬁciency (stage 3 
or greater CKD) or hemodialysis
Thoracoabdominal aortic an-
eurysm extent
COPD and FEV1 /g10050% predicted Pulmonary disease
Previous stroke9 Need for iliac access
Zone 1/2 landing for thoracic 
stent graft7
CKD indicates chronic kidney disease; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; and TAA, thoracic 
aortic aneurysm.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e390
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. TEVAR is associated with a reduced periopera-
tive morbidity, reduced hospital length of stay, and 
better freedom from aneurysm-related mortality 
compared to open surgical repair, based on clini-
cal device trial data. 1,3,10 In the study by Makaroun 
et al in 2008, 13 140 patients with fusiform aneu-
rysms were treated with TEVAR and compared 
with 94 open surgical controls. At 5 years, there 
was a decreased aneurysm-related mortality 
(2.8% versus 11.7%, respectively, P =0.008), a 
reduced major adverse event rate (57 .9% ver-
sus 78.7%, respectively, P =0.01), and decreased 
major aneurysm-related reintervention (3.6% ver-
sus 2.1%, respectively) in TEVAR versus open 
repair. In the study by Matsumura et al, 10 survival 
was noninferior for TEVAR (98.1%) versus open 
surgery (94.3%) at 30 days, but the severe mor-
bidity composite index, a marker for postoperative 
complications, was lower for TEVAR (0.2±0.7 ver-
sus 0.7±1.2, respectively; P<0.01). In the study 
by Fairman et al, 11 195 TEVAR patients were 
compared with 189 open surgical controls, and 
the 30-day mortality rate was lower (2% versus 
8%, respectively; P <0.01) and the major adverse 
event rate was lower (41% versus 84%, respec-
tively; P<0.01) for TEVAR; at 1 year, aneurysm-
related mortality rate was lower for TEVAR than 
for open repair (3.1% versus 11.6%, respectively; 
P<0.002). However, in a registry study using 
Medicare claims data, 4 although short-term out-
comes were similarly better with TEVAR com-
pared with open repair, that survival advantage 
was no longer present at 1 year and, at 5 years, 
survival was significantly worse for TEVAR ver-
sus open repair at 79% versus 89%, respectively 
(P<0.0001). Overall, the data show that TEVAR 
is beneficial in the short- to intermediate-term in 
patients with appropriate anatomy for endovascu-
lar repair, but the advantage is not sustained over 
time.
2. Because of the relatively large delivery systems 
for thoracic endografting, iliac artery graft con-
duits may be required to ensure safe delivery of 
the endograft into the aorta. In the clinical device 
trials, access of vessels other than the femoral 
artery was required in 9.4% to 21.1% of patients 
because of small or diseased access vessels. 1-3 In 
a multicenter cohort study from the GREAT (Global 
Registry for Endovascular Aortic Treatment) regis-
try,5 the overall access complication rate was 2.8%, 
and women had a higher rate of access complica-
tions than men (4.7% versus 1.8%, respectively; 
P=0.013), with a higher rate of the need for iliac 
and aortic access or surgical conduit, as well as 
access vessel thrombosis irrespective of the clini-
cal setting, type of aortic disease, and device sizing.
3. Open descending thoracic aortic repair can be per-
formed with low morbidity and mortality rates in 
high-volume centers.6-8,14 In a multicenter retrospec-
tive study using the MEDPAR (Medicare Provider 
Analysis and Review) data, 15 the overall mortality 
rate after open surgical repair of descending TAA 
decreased in high-volume versus low-volume cen-
ters (11% versus 15%; P <0.01). In addition, data 
using Medicare claims show that the benefit of 
TEVAR is no longer present 1 year after endovas-
cular therapy, with a significantly worse 5-year sur-
vival compared with open repair (79% versus 89%; 
P<0.0001).4 In a recent retrospective, single-center 
study in which propensity score matching analysis 
was used to compare the outcomes of open and 
endovascular descending and TAAA repair in 278 
pairs of patients, 16 open repair resulted in better 
10-year survival than endovascular repair (52% ver-
sus 33%; P<0.0001). Because of the lack of avail-
able long-term data on aortic-specific mortality rate 
in young patients after TEVAR, in patients deemed 
to have a life-expectancy of ≥10 years, open surgi-
cal repair is reasonable.
6.5.3.3. Left Subclavian Artery Management
Recommendations for Left Subclavian Artery Management
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with descending TAA who undergo 
TEVAR with planned left subclavian artery 
coverage, revascularization of the left subcla-
vian artery before TEVAR is recommended to 
prevent spinal cord injury (SCI)1,2 and poten-
tially to reduce stroke risk2 and prevent other 
ischemic  complications.
2b C-LD
2. In patients with descending TAA who have 
undergone TEVAR with left subclavian cover-
age and develop SCI that is unresponsive 
to an increase in BP or a cerebrospinal fluid 
drain, left subclavian artery revascularization 
may be considered.3
Synopsis
Left subclavian artery coverage is required in up to 40% 
of cases of TEVAR of descending TAAs.4 SCI and stroke 
remain devastating complications associated with TEVAR. 
Addressing these modifiable risk factors would allow 
for better outcomes after this less invasive treatment 
strategy. In addition, special considerations include the 
prevention of vertebrobasilar insufficiency (particularly 
among those with a dominant left vertebral artery), pres-
ervation of any preexisting left internal mammary artery 
coronary bypass graft, as well as left upper extremity 
dialysis access or other left upper extremity-based graft. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e391
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Currently, pivotal as well as feasibility trials are ongoing 
for branched endografts intending to preserve flow to 
the left subclavian artery. Longer-term follow-up of this 
technology is needed, but initial results are promising.5,6
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Up to 40% of patients undergoing TEVAR for thoracic 
aneurysm repair require left subclavian artery cover-
age. Preoperative left subclavian revascularization 
has been shown to decrease the rates of stroke2,7 ,8 
and SCI.1,2 Vertebrobasilar insufficiency and left arm 
ischemia can also occur without left subclavian artery 
revascularization.9,10 Patients with a patent left inter-
nal mammary artery to left anterior descending artery 
coronary artery bypass graft, or who are otherwise 
reliant on inflow from the left subclavian artery (eg, 
for dialysis access), should undergo left subclavian 
revascularization to preserve flow.9
2. Patients undergoing TEVAR with left subclavian 
coverage may not be hemodynamically stable 
enough to undergo preemptive revascularization of 
the left subclavian artery. If such patients go on to 
develop SCI after TEVAR, there have been case 
reports of SCI reversal with secondary revascular-
ization of the left subclavian artery.3
6.5.3.4. Celiac Artery Management
Recommendation for Celiac Artery Management
References that support the recommendation are included in the 
Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendation
2a B-NR
1. In patients with descending TAA undergoing 
TEVAR in whom celiac artery coverage is 
being considered, it is reasonable to first con-
firm adequate collateralization.1
Synopsis
Celiac artery coverage is estimated to be necessary 
in 15% of patients undergoing TEVAR for descend-
ing TAA repair.2 The safety and use of this practice has 
previously been shown with single-institution series cit-
ing low incidence of postoperative visceral ischemia. 
However, despite the preoperative evaluation with CTA, 
angiography, or both to confirm adequate collateraliza-
tion between the celiac and superior mesenteric artery 
(SMA), a small percentage of patients still die from vis-
ceral ischemia. In addition, late distal migration of the 
endograft can encroach on the SMA, creating SMA 
stenosis and compromising flow through the SMA and 
celiac-based collaterals.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Migration of the endograft distally over time can 
cause stenosis of the SMA and decrease flow to 
the SMA and celiac artery-based collaterals. In 
patients undergoing TEVAR with celiac artery cov-
erage who have adequate collateralization on CTA, 
angiography, or both, a small percentage of patients 
go on to develop postoperative visceral ischemia. 
Although the risk of visceral ischemia after celiac 
artery coverage with TEVAR is relatively low, there 
remains a finite risk (3.2% in largest clinical series)3 
for visceral ischemic complications, which can lead 
to death.
6.5.3.5. Ruptured Descending TAA
Recommendations for Ruptured Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with ruptured descending TAA who 
are anatomic candidates for endovascular 
repair, TEVAR is recommended over open 
repair because of decreased perioperative 
death and morbidity.1-5
2b B-NR
2. In patients with ruptured descending TAA 
undergoing TEVAR, intentional coverage of 
the left subclavian artery, celiac artery, or both 
may be considered to increase the landing 
zone for endovascular repair.5-7
Synopsis
Ruptured TAA carry a high mortality rate. Single-center 
data, meta-analyses, and clinical trials have all shown 
the lower rates of perioperative death and complica-
tions associated with endovascular versus open surgical 
repair.1-5 However, the survival advantage shown in Medi-
care-based claims data disappears after 1.5 years, 4 and 
single-institution series 1,3 reflect the frequent need for 
reintervention over time. Furthermore, a meta-analysis 2 
showed that aneurysm-related survival was decreased in 
the TEVAR group over time, underscoring the importance 
of continued surveillance in this high-risk population.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. For repair of ruptured descending TAA, TEVAR is 
associated with decreased perioperative morbid-
ity and mortality compared with open repair. In 1 
retrospective multi-institution study, TEVAR had a 
lower composite rate of death, stroke, and perma-
nent paraplegia compared with open surgery and 
a trend toward lower aneurysm-related mortality 
at 4 years.1 Similarly, a meta-analysis showed that 
TEVAR was associated with a lower perioperative 
mortality and myocardial infarction rate compared 
with open repair.1 A multicenter, prospective clinical 
trial for aortic catastrophes—including aortic rup-
ture—showed that TEVAR was superior with regard 
to the composite endpoint of mortality and para-
plegia, compared with open repair. 5 Although the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e392
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
perioperative benefit of endovascular repair of rup-
tured TAA was again corroborated in a Medicare-
claims dataset, the survival advantage with TEVAR 
disappeared after 1.5 years.4
2. When ruptured descending TAA present, coverage 
of the left subclavian artery, celiac artery, or both 
may be necessary to gain the necessary 2 cm of 
seal zone for successful endovascular repair. Left 
subclavian artery and celiac artery coverage during 
thoracic aortic rupture has been associated with 
reasonable technical success and outcomes in sin-
gle-institution series6 and 1 clinical trial5 in patients 
with acute rupture or complicated dissection of the 
descending thoracic aorta.
6.5.3.6. Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending TAA
Recommendations for Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending TAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with descending TAA undergoing 
TEVAR, review of preoperative CTA of the 
iliofemoral vessels should be performed to 
evaluate access.1,2
1 B-NR
2. In patients with descending TAA undergoing 
TEVAR, if iliac access is marginal or inade-
quate to prevent access-related complications, 
the use of alternative conduits is recom-
mended.1,2
2a B-NR
3. In patients with descending TAA undergo-
ing TEVAR who have suitable anatomy, 
total percutaneous femoral access is a 
reasonable alternative to open surgi-
cal cutdown to avoid access-related 
 complications. 3-5
Synopsis
Iliac artery access for stent-graft delivery systems is 
marginal in up to 21% of cases in which TEVAR is per-
formed for descending TAA.1 Careful review of the CTA 
of the iliofemoral system is required to ensure that mar-
ginal or inadequate access is noted and properly man-
aged. Marginal access can be successfully circumvented 
using surgical bypass, direct aortic or iliac exposure, or 
endovascular techniques to treat vessel stenosis. Percu-
taneous access was used successfully for endovascular 
abdominal aortic repair before it was applied to larger 
sheath devices. This technology has also been applied 
to TEVAR with a similarly high degree of success and 
reduced hospital length of stay.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Thoracic endovascular stent grafts are housed in 
large delivery systems, thus thorough review of 
the iliofemoral system is required to avoid access 
complications. In the clinical device trials, alter-
native access was required in 9.4% to 21.1% 
of patients because of small or diseased access 
vessels.6-8
2. Alternative access was required in up to 21.1% 
of patients undergoing TEVAR in the clinical 
device trials.8 Women have a higher incidence of 
smaller diameter external iliac arteries compared 
with men. 1,2 Direct aortic or iliac artery exposure, 
iliac conduits, or endovascular techniques may 
be used to facilitate safe delivery of endografts 
during TEVAR. 1,2 Preoperative case planning will 
enable safe delivery of endografts without vascular 
complications.
3. Percutaneous access for delivery of TEVAR has 
been performed safely and with a high degree of 
success, as shown in single-institution 4,5 as well 
as multi-institution registries. 3 Technical success 
ranged from 94.4% to 98.9%, and percutaneous 
access was associated with fewer complications 
and a shorter length of stay compared with those 
with surgical cutdown.
6.5.4. Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysms
6.5.4.1. Size Thresholds for Open Surgical Repair of TAAA
Recommendations for Size Thresholds for Open Surgical Repair of 
TAAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA, 
repair is recommended when the diameter is 
≥6.0 cm.1-3
2a B-NR
2. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA, 
repair is reasonable when the diameter is 
≥5.5 cm and the repair is performed by expe-
rienced surgeons in a Multidisciplinary Aortic 
Team.1-3
2a B-NR
3. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA 
who have features associated with an 
increased risk of rupture (Table 19), 
repair is reasonable when the diameter is 
<5.5 cm. 4
Synopsis
The data supporting aortic diameter thresholds for either 
open or endovascular repair of TAAA are similar to that 
presented for repair of descending TAA (see Section 
6.5.3, “Descending Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms”). All 
are single-institution series with longitudinal follow-up 
Table 19. F eatures Associated With an Increased Risk of 
TAAA Rupture
Rapid growth (conﬁrmed increase in diameter of /g1160.5 cm/y)
Symptomatic aneurysm
Signiﬁcant change in aneurysm appearance
Saccular aneurysm or presence of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers
TAAA indicates thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e393
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
via surveillance imaging and detection of aortic-related 
events and death. Intervention at diameters of <6.0 cm 
would reduce aortic-related events and death. There 
are also conditions in which intervention may be justi-
fied at smaller diameters (eg, rapid growth, symptoms, 
penetrating ulcers, mycotic aneurysms, connective tissue 
disorders). Concerns for operative death in the setting 
of comorbid conditions is certainly justified. However, in 
centers with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team, excellent 
outcomes can be obtained despite the presence of such 
conditions, and fatal aortic events may thus be avoided.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Aortic event rates begin to rise significantly, and 
5-year survival begins to fall when TAAA diame-
ters are >6.0 cm. At this diameter, the risk of an 
adverse aortic event ranges from 9.3% 1 to 19%, 3 
which is 2 to 4 times the median operative mortal-
ity rate for open TAAA repair. In patients with mul-
tiple comorbidities known to substantially increase 
the risk of open TAAA repair (eg, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, advanced age, preopera-
tive renal dysfunction, preoperative left ventricular 
dysfunction), it may be appropriate to continue to 
observe patients with TAAA diameters >6.0 cm or 
to refer them for endovascular repair.
2. In centers with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team, 
despite the presence of comorbid conditions, 
excellent outcomes can be achieved with meticu-
lous perioperative preparation and care as well as 
technically sound surgery. On multivariable analy-
sis, patients undergoing TAAA repair with a left 
ventricular ejection fraction <40% were not more 
prone to operative death (OR, 0.28; 95% CI, 0.02–
4.14; P=0.58) or long-term death (OR, 0.55; 95% 
CI, 0.17–1.80; P=0.23) than those with higher 
ejection fractions. 5 Similarly, carefully selected 
octogenarians undergoing open TAAA repair had a 
similar operative mortality rate as those <80 years 
of age (5.2% versus 5.7%; P=0.852).6
3. Certain clinical factors associated with an 
increased risk of TAAA rupture may prompt con-
sideration of open or endovascular intervention 
at a diameter below the standard surgical thresh-
olds. In patients with intact TAAA who are being 
observed with surveillance imaging, confirmed 
rapid aneurysm growth (≥0.5 cm/y) would suggest 
the need for intervention regardless of absolute 
diameter.4 Symptoms consistent with an enlarging 
TAAA that are not attributable to alternative pathol-
ogy portend potential rupture and also suggest the 
need for surgery.7 Patients with symptoms second-
ary to either PAU or saccular aneurysms are also at 
a higher risk for rupture and should be considered 
for intervention regardless of absolute diameter.8
6.5.4.2. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of TAAA
Recommendations for Open Versus Endovascular Repair of TAAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
Ruptured TAAA
1 B-NR 1. In patients with ruptured TAAA requiring inter-
vention, open repair is recommended.1-5
2b C-LD
2. In patients with ruptured TAAA requiring inter-
vention, provided that the patient is hemo-
dynamically stable, endovascular repair may 
be reasonable in centers with endovascular 
expertise and access to appropriate endovas-
cular stent grafts.6
Intact TAAA
1 C-LD
3. In patients with Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syn-
drome and intact TAAA requiring intervention, 
open repair is recommended over endovascu-
lar repair.7-9
2b B-NR
4. In patients with intact degenerative TAAA 
and suitable anatomy, endovascular repair 
with fenestrated stent grafts, branched 
stent grafts, or both may be considered in 
centers with endovascular expertise and 
access to appropriate endovascular stent 
grafts. 10-13
Synopsis
There are no RCTs comparing early or late outcomes 
for open versus endovascular repair for TAAA. As of 
November 2022, there are no FDA-approved devices for 
endovascular TAAA repair. Most of the endovascular pro-
cedures currently performed are done so with customized 
fenestrated or branched endografts on investigational 
device exemption- or industry-sponsored trials. Although 
the number of endovascular repairs performed has been 
steadily increasing, follow-up remains limited, and open 
repair therefore remains the preferred therapy for patients 
with TAAA who require intervention. The results for open 
repair are excellent in centers with a Multidisciplinary Aor-
tic Team. In the largest series published to date, the oper-
ative mortality rate in 3 309 patients undergoing open 
TAAA repair was 7 .5%, including >1 000 patients under-
going repair of an extent II aneurysm, with a low risk of 
aortic-related reintervention. Other high-volume centers 
have reported similar outcomes for open repair. In 1 cen-
ter, the operative mortality rate in 783 patients was 5.6%, 
with a low risk of SCI of 2.0% and need for postoperative 
hemodialysis of 5.2%. Another center, whose operators 
used deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, reported an 
operative mortality rate of 6.8% with an SCI risk of <3% 
and postoperative hemodialysis risk of 2.2%.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with ruptured TAAA, open repair can 
be performed with low mortality by surgeons in 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e394
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
centers with a Multidisciplinary Aortic Team. In a 
series of 100 consecutive patients with ruptured 
TAAA, an operative mortality rate of 14% and 
an SCI rate of 5% was achieved. 5 Although the 
study population was replete with comorbid con-
ditions, the only risk factor remaining significant 
after propensity matching was “shock” on arrival 
to the hospital. Furthermore, 5-year actuarial sur-
vival was 47 .5%. Centers experienced in complex 
endovascular repair may opt to use this technique. 
In a national registry of 140 ruptured descending 
aneurysms, the operative mortality rate (10%) was 
good, but there was a disappointingly high rate of 
stroke (14.7%), SCI (9.6%), and need for reinter-
vention within 30 days (19.7%). At a median fol-
low-up of 17 months, actuarial 5-year survival rate 
was 31.9%. These results were similar to those 
reported from a device registry. 1,5 Although com-
plex endovascular repair of intact TAAA has shown 
promise in experienced hands and in select cen-
ters, in the setting of TAAA rupture, the endovascu-
lar approach is hampered by patient instability and 
the need for customized grafts (which may take 
several weeks to manufacture). In addition, most 
of the reported series of endovascular repair of 
ruptured TAAA are small; larger series with longer-
term follow-up will be necessary to delineate the 
role for endovascular repair in the setting of aortic 
rupture.
2. Endovascular repair requires sequential steps for 
successful stenting of side branches without the 
ability to achieve rapid control of hemorrhage. 
Therefore, the role of off-the-shelf branched repair 
has been limited in patients with ruptured aneu-
rysms and hemodynamic instability. However, in 
higher-risk patients who present with symptomatic 
or contained ruptured aneurysms, are hemody-
namically stable, and have suitable anatomy, endo-
vascular repair with an off-the-shelf or modified 
device may be considered. Kolbel et al14 reported a 
mortality rate of 15% for symptomatic and 30% for 
ruptured TAAA treated by multibranch endovascu-
lar repair.
3. In patients with known or suspected connec-
tive tissue disorders, such as Marfan syndrome, 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, or vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome, open repair is recommended. Operative 
mortality rate is lower than in the general popula-
tion undergoing open TAAA repair, as is the inci-
dence of major complications, such as stroke and 
SCI. Importantly, freedom from aortic reintervention 
is excellent, as is long-term survival. Conversely, 
data are lacking on complex endovascular repair of 
TAAA for patients with connective tissue disorders. 
A small study of 17 patients treated by fenestrated-
branched endovascular aortic repair (FEVAR) had 
no mortality rate, 100% technical success, and 1 
reintervention at mean follow-up of 34 months. 6 
Endovascular repair may be reasonable in patients 
who failed previous open repair or are considered 
high risk and have stent-grafts placed into synthetic 
landing zones, or when used as a bridge to open 
repair in patients with hemodynamic instability.
4. Single- and multi-institution series of physician-
sponsored investigational device exempt trials have 
shown the promise of fenestrated and branched 
endovascular stent grafts. When performed by 
experienced surgeons, technical success may be 
achieved in a high percentage of cases (92%–
99.6%) with low perioperative mortality rate. At 
1-year follow-up imaging, branch vessel patency 
was also good (96%–98%) and, at 3 years, free-
dom from aortic-related death was 91% and over-
all survival 57%.15
6.5.4.3. TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
Recommendations for TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A
1. In patients undergoing open TAAA repair who 
are at high risk for SCI, cerebrospinal fluid 
drainage is recommended to reduce the inci-
dence of temporary SCI, permanent SCI, or 
both.1-7
1 B-NR
2. In patients who experience delayed spinal 
cord dysfunction after either open or endo-
vascular TAAA repair, timely measures to 
optimize spinal cord perfusion and decrease 
intrathecal pressure are recommended 
(Table 20).1-4,8
Synopsis
SCI is a devastating complication of open and endo-
vascular thoracoabdominal aneurysm repair, with an 
incidence rate of 2% to 15%, depending on aneurysm 
extent and cause, underlying patient comorbidities, 
urgency of the procedure, and surgeon and center expe-
rience. Previous ACC/AHA guidelines did not address 
the issue other than to suggest higher-risk populations 
that might benefit from adjuncts to reduce the incidence 
of SCI.9 The 2014 European guidelines assigned cere-
brospinal fluid drainage a I B recommendation to reduce 
the risk of SCI. 10 However, data were limited at the time 
Table 20. Measures to Optimize Spinal Cord and End-Organ 
Perfusion
Cardioversion for tachyarrhythmias
Insertion of cerebrospinal ﬂuid drain
Increase mean arterial pressure to >100 mm Hg
Transfuse to a hemoglobin >10 g/dL
Volume resuscitation
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e395
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
to support this recommendation, and an earlier RCT 11 
had not shown a benefit for cerebrospinal fluid drainage 
in TAAA repair. A more recent RCT did show a significant 
reduction in SCI for a cohort undergoing repair of exten-
sive TAAA (extent I and extent II) when cerebrospinal 
fluid drainage was used. Additional nonrandomized data 
support this recommendation.
Delayed SCI may occur up to 2 weeks after surgery. 
This complication has a profound impact on short- and 
long-term outcomes. 10,12 Early recognition and aggres-
sive management of SCI can lead to a return of lower 
extremity function. The reinsertion of a cerebrospinal 
fluid drain is a key component to salvage lower extrem-
ity function. Additional therapies, such as volume loading, 
increasing mean arterial pressure, and maximizing oxy-
gen delivery to the cord through transfusion or supple-
mental oxygen, are also critical.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. TAAA repair remains a formidable undertak-
ing regardless of whether open or endovascular 
repair is performed. SCI, with either paraparesis or 
paraplegia, may be temporary or permanent and 
has a profoundly negative impact on short- and 
long-term survival as well as quality of life after 
repair. Many techniques have been suggested to 
reduce the incidence of this significant complica-
tion. Intraoperative management ranges from deep 
hypothermic circulatory arrest to left heart bypass 
to a “clamp-and-sew” technique, and support exists 
for each approach. Similarly, intraoperative and 
postoperative spinal cord neuromonitoring is not 
widespread but has support that is institutionally 
based. Other interventions have been also advo-
cated as intrathecal papaverine to enhance spinal 
cord protection. 13 Cerebrospinal fluid drainage 
remains the only technique proven to reduce the 
incidence of perioperative SCI. In an RCT exam-
ining the incidence of SCI in patients undergoing 
high-risk extent I and II TAAA repair, cerebrospi-
nal fluid drainage was associated with a signifi-
cant reduction in SCI compared with those having 
surgery without cerebrospinal fluid drainage. Over 
the past decade, there are few centers performing 
open TAAA repair without the aid of cerebrospinal 
fluid drainage. Furthermore, patients undergoing 
endovascular repair requiring extensive descending 
thoracic aorta coverage or in the setting of a pre-
vious infrarenal aneurysm repair also benefit from 
cerebrospinal fluid drainage (nonrandomized).6
2. In patients undergoing open TAAA repair, delayed 
paraplegia may account for nearly 60% of all spi-
nal cord deficits encountered. Despite having an 
intact neurologic examination immediately after the 
procedure, patients can experience these delayed 
deficits anytime in the first 2 weeks postoperatively. 
The reported incidence of delayed SCI is approxi-
mately 5%, nearly twice that of deficits recognized 
immediately after surgery. Delayed deficits usu-
ally present in the setting of a hemodynamic insult 
(atrial fibrillation, hypovolemia, hemorrhage, infec-
tion) and may be responsive to aggressive mea-
sures to optimize spinal cord perfusion (Table 20). 
Cerebrospinal fluid drainage immediately reduces 
intrathecal pressure and increases spinal cord 
perfusion pressure (spinal cord perfusion pres-
sure equals mean arterial pressure minus spinal 
cord fluid pressure). 8,12,14 A significant proportion 
(57%) of patients with late deficits experience an 
improvement in their neurologic examination, with 
17% having complete resolution of their deficits.14 
The operative mortality rate for those with persis-
tent SCI is nearly 3-fold higher than for those who 
recover (38% versus 13%, respectively; P<0.001). 
In addition, 5-year survival is significantly worse 
(from 75% with a return of function to 28% with-
out; P<0.001).14
6.5.4.4. TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ Protection
Recommendations for TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ Protection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A
1. In patients undergoing open repair of TAAA 
involving the renal arteries, cold blood or crys-
talloid renal perfusion is recommended to pro-
vide effective protection against renal injury.1-6
1 B-NR
2. In patients undergoing open or endovascular 
TAAA repair who have end-organ ischemia or 
significant stenoses from atherosclerotic vis-
ceral or renal artery disease, additional revas-
cularization procedures are recommended.7
Synopsis
Postoperative renal dysfunction after open TAAA repair 
has a significantly negative impact on short- and long-
term mortality as well as quality of life. Efforts to reduce 
renal injury during open TAAA repair include local organ 
hypothermia with either cold crystalloid or cold blood-
based perfusate.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Renal dysfunction after TAAA repair is defined as 
a doubling of the creatinine or the need for hemo-
dialysis. When this significant complication occurs, 
short- and long-term survival is compromised, and 
the incidence of postoperative respiratory failure, 
SCI, and cardiac complications increase. To iden-
tify methods to reduce the incidence of postop-
erative renal dysfunction, 2 RCTs were performed 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e396
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
comparing cold crystalloid renal preservation to nor-
mothermic blood perfusate and, subsequently, cold 
blood perfusate. When compared with normother-
mic blood delivered into the renal arteries directly 
from the left heart bypass circuit, the delivery of cold 
crystalloid perfusate into the renal arteries during 
open TAAA repair resulted in a 3-fold reduction in 
the incidence of postoperative renal dysfunction. 7 
Subsequently, cold blood perfusate delivered to 
the renal arteries through occlusion or perfusion 
catheters was found to provide the same level of 
renal protection as cold crystalloid perfusate during 
open TAAA repair.5 The results of this second RCT 
provided surgeons with 2 options for renal protec-
tion when open TAAA repair requires renal artery 
reconstruction.
2. In patients with renal or visceral artery stenoses 
or ostial obstruction secondary to chronic or acute 
dissection flaps, end-organ perfusion may be com-
promised. Improvement in perfusion to the celiac 
axis, SMA, and both renal arteries may be achieved 
by bypass, endarterectomy, or balloon angioplasty 
and stent placement. Patency of target vessel 
revascularization strategies has been documented 
in small series of patients having open TAAA repair 
with a “debranching” technique and in those under-
going endovascular TAAA repair.
6.5.5. Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms
6.5.5.1. Access During Endovascular Repair of AAA
Recommendation for Access During Endovascular Repair of AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendation
1 B-R
1. In patients undergoing endovascular repair 
of AAA who have suitable common femoral 
artery anatomy, ultrasound-guided percutane-
ous access and closure is recommended over 
open cutdown to reduce operative time, blood 
loss, length of stay, time to wound healing, and 
pain.1,2
Synopsis
Increased availability of percutaneous closure devices 
and lower profile endovascular stent grafts have made 
ultrasound-guided percutaneous access and closure 
more feasible. Two RCTs and a large national retrospec-
tive review showed favorable outcomes from percutane-
ous common femoral artery access and closure such as 
reduced operative time, reduced blood loss, and improved 
patient-centered outcomes, such as reduced pain.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The PEVAR trial showed the noninferiority of 
total percutaneous access and closure for EVAR 
for those with suitable common femoral artery 
anatomy.3 In the PiERO (Percutaneous femoral 
access in Endovascular Repair versus Open femo-
ral access) study, investigators evaluated whether 
ultrasound-guided percutaneous access via the 
common femoral artery decreased the risk of 
surgical site infections compared with cutdown. 
Although the incidence of surgical site infections 
was too low to produce a difference in outcomes, 
investigators found that, compared with open cut-
down for access, groins accessed and closed per-
cutaneously healed faster and patients reported 
less pain.1 Although the PEVAR trial did not require 
ultrasound-guided femoral access, it was routine in 
the PiERO trial. Furthermore, a multicenter obser-
vational study of common femoral artery access 
showed a significant decrease in groin hematomas 
with routine ultrasound-guided access. 4 Lastly, in 
an extensive comparison of different closures using 
data from 13 087 patients in the Vascular Quality 
Initiative registry, there was a significantly higher 
rate of cardiac complications (OR, 1.5; 95% CI, 
1.14–2.05) and 30-day mortality rate (OR, 1.56; 
95% CI, 1.05–2.32)2 in those undergoing cutdown 
versus percutaneous access.2 Operative time, esti-
mated blood loss, and length of stay were all signifi-
cantly higher in those undergoing groin cutdowns 
compared with percutaneous access.
6.5.5.2. Repair of Ruptured AAA
Recommendations for Repair of Ruptured AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-R
1. In patients presenting with ruptured AAA 
who are hemodynamically stable, CT imag-
ing is recommended to evaluate whether 
the AAA is amenable to endovascular 
repair.1-3
1 B-R
2. In patients presenting with ruptured AAA 
who have suitable anatomy, endovas-
cular repair is recommended over open 
repair to reduce the risk of morbidity and 
 mortality.1,4-6
2a B-NR
3. In patients undergoing endovascular repair for 
ruptured AAA, local anesthesia is preferred to 
general anesthesia to reduce risk of periop-
erative mortality.7-9
2a C-LD
4. In patients with ruptured AAA, permissive 
hypotension can be beneficial to decrease the 
rate of bleeding.1,3,10-12
Synopsis
The mortality rate from ruptured abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms (rAAA) is estimated to be 80% to 90%, with most 
patients never reaching the hospital. 13 For those who 
present to a hospital, the historical mortality rate for open 
repair was approximately 50%. With improved team 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e397
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
organization, prompt diagnosis, and endovascular repair 
options, the mortality rate after repair for rAAA has been 
reported to be as low as 18.5% after instituting an endo-
vascular repair-first strategy in at least 1 observational 
series.1 Initial randomized trials for endovascular repair 
for rAAA (rEVAR) versus open repair generally showed 
no early survival benefit. However, shortcomings of these 
trials raised questions about their applicability. 2,14,15 Lon-
ger-term studies of rEVAR, such as 3-year results from 
the IMPROVE (Immediate Management of the Patient 
With Rupture: Open Versus Endovascular Repair) trial, 
showed late survival benefit from rEVAR over open repair. 
Many authors have evaluated institutional experience 
with using rEVAR in anatomically suitable candidates 
and aimed to improve the process of care for rAAA by 
adopting “rupture protocols” that include early imaging, 
permissive hypotension, endovascular balloon occlusion 
under fluoroscopy to reduce excessive bleeding, and a 
team-based organization to facilitate immediate transfer 
of patients to the operating room for prompt hemorrhage 
control and repair.1,3
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The IMPROVE trial was the first trial to evaluate 
a new paradigm in evaluating rAAA. 2 Specifically, 
patients who were hemodynamically stable were 
first transported to the radiology suite for CTA 
to assess whether their ruptured aneurysm was 
amenable to endovascular repair or required open 
repair. This is in contrast to a strategy of transport 
to the operating room for open surgery without 
preoperative imaging. The trial did not identify any 
increased risk of death from a strategy of acquiring 
preoperative imaging and, because of the different 
repair options available today, such assessments 
can help surgeons choose appropriate therapy 
based on patient aneurysm anatomy and clinical 
status. In contemporary practice, many patients 
will have a CT scan, although some of these scans 
will not be ideally timed arterial phase imaging. 
Given that time is of the essence in rAAA repair, 
if a patient’s CT scan provides enough anatomic 
information to identify whether endovascular repair 
is feasible, another more dedicated CTA scan may 
add unnecessary delays to the patient’s care.
2. Although 3 clinical trials aimed to evaluate poten-
tial survival benefit for rEVAR over open repair, 
none showed significant early benefit. However, tri-
als excluded patients who were hemodynamically 
unstable, thus excluding patients that may have 
benefitted most from an endovascular approach. It 
should be noted, however, that the IMPROVE trial 
subsequently showed that between 90 days and 
3 years, rEVAR had superior survival rates com-
pared with open repair (hazard ratio, 0.57; 95% CI, 
0.36–0.9).16 Contemporary observational studies 
showed significant survival benefit from an endo-
vascular approach to rAAA. For example, Wang 
et al 6 used propensity-matched data from the 
Vascular Quality Initiative registry and showed that 
rEVAR resulted in a lower 30-day mortality rate 
than open repair (21% versus 34%, respectively; 
P<0.001) and that mortality rates after rEVAR 
have been steadily decreasing since 2008. Other 
studies have corroborated this general decline in 
the rEVAR mortality rate and comparatively better 
postoperative outcomes. 4,17 Newer endovascular 
devices have enabled treatments of rAAA that do 
not necessarily meet instructions for use criteria. 
However, caution should be exercised, because 
observational studies showed increased risk of 
perioperative death and long-term complica-
tions when devices are used off-label in a rupture 
scenario.18,19
3. Patients presenting with rAAA often maintain 
adequate BPs, in part because of the body’s cat-
echolamine responses. 20 However, once induced 
with general anesthesia, the loss of this physiologic 
response—coupled with anesthetic agents that can 
depress BP—can lead to circulatory collapse. 21-23 
General anesthesia has also been shown to have 
deleterious effects on inflammatory and body 
temperature regulation. 24,25 Subanalysis of the 
IMPROVE trial showed that patients with rAAA who 
underwent EVAR with only local anesthesia had 
lower risk of mortality compared with those who 
were treated under general anesthesia (adjusted 
OR, 0.27; 95% CI, 0.1–0.7). 7 Although the trial 
was not designed and powered for this specific 
outcome, recent observational studies from large 
registries have corroborated this finding.8,9
4. Although there are no RCTs of outcomes specific 
to permissive hypotension in rAAA, data from the 
trauma literature evaluating fluid management in 
hemorrhagic shock show benefit in using a strat-
egy of permissive hypotension. 11,12 Many authors 
managing rAAA have similarly described main-
taining low arterial pressures to decrease rate of 
bleeding in patients with rAAA. 1,3,10 An SBP that 
allows a patient to maintain mentation, typically 
between 60 and 90 mm Hg, is suggested.
6.5.5.3. Threshold for AAA Repair
Recommendations for the Threshold for AAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A
1. In patients with unruptured AAA, repair is rec-
ommended in those with a maximal aneurysm 
diameter of ≥5.5 cm in men or ≥5.0 cm in 
women.1-6
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e398
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
1 B-NR
2. In patients with unruptured AAA who have 
symptoms that are attributable to the aneu-
rysm, repair is recommended to reduce the 
risk of rupture.7, 8
2b C-LD
3. In patients with unruptured saccular AAA, 
intervention to reduce the risk of rupture may 
be reasonable.9
2b C-LD
4. In patients with unruptured AAA and aneu-
rysm growth of ≥0.5 cm in 6 months, repair 
to reduce the risk of rupture may be reason-
able.1-5
Synopsis
One of the most significant risk factors for continued 
aneurysm growth and rupture is the maximum diameter. 
Thresholds for AAA repair must balance the expected 
risk of rupture against the risk of operative interven-
tion. Historically, the risk of rupture was reported to be 
0.5% to 5% for aneurysms <5 cm in maximum diameter, 
3% to 15% for aneurysms 5 cm to 6.9 cm, and ≥30% 
for aneurysms ≥8 cm. 10 Multiple trials that are now >2 
decades old evaluated the use of early repair of AAAs 
measuring 4.0 cm to 5.4 cm via open or endovascular 
means. All found no survival benefit attributable to early 
repair and but did find an increased risk of subsequent 
reintervention. These studies and others have found that 
rupture does occur at smaller diameters for women; thus, 
size thresholds for men and women differ to account 
for these observed differences. 6,11 Newer data highlight 
other considerations, such as aortic indexing, which may 
better predict aneurysm rupture risk. Lastly, although lim-
ited data exist for the natural history of saccular AAAs, 
available data suggest that their morphologic features 
may make them more likely to become symptomatic, 
rupture at smaller diameters, or both than fusiform AAAs.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Clinical trials conducted in the late 1990s and 
early 2000s, including the UKSAT (UK Small 
Aneurysm Trial) and ADAM (Aneurysm Detection 
and Management) trial for early open aneurysm 
repair and CAESAR (Comparison of surveillance 
vs. Aortic Endografting for Small Aneurysm Repair) 
and PIVOTAL (Positive Impact of endoVascular 
Options for Treating Aneurysm earLy) trials for early 
endovascular repair, did not find a survival benefit 
for repair of aortic aneurysms measuring 4.0 cm 
to 5.4 cm. 1-5 Although long-term outcomes in the 
UKSAT group seemed to show better survival rates 
in patients in the early open surgery group, this was 
thought to be attributable to higher rates of smok-
ing cessation in the early surgery group compared 
with the surveillance group.2,3 Based on these data, 
balancing the risk of intervention versus the risk 
of rupture, a threshold of ≥5.5 cm is acceptable 
for men with infrarenal AAA. In the UKSAT study, 
which included more women than the previous 
studies, women were found to have higher rates 
of aneurysm rupture and higher rates of aneu-
rysm-related deaths than men. 2,3 The mean maxi-
mum aneurysm diameter at rupture was 5.0 cm in 
women and 6.0 cm in men. More recent data high-
light a different method for quantifying aneurysm 
rupture risk by indexing aneurysm size to the BSA 
(ASI equals aneurysm diameter [cm]/BSA [m2]); in 
women, ASI has been shown to be more predictive 
of rupture risk than is maximum diameter.12 Further 
research will help clarify whether ASI is a better 
metric for aneurysm repair thresholds than maxi-
mum diameter.12
2. Approximately 6% to 22% of treated aneurysms 
are symptomatic but unruptured. Symptoms that 
are considered high risk for impending rupture 
include pain in the back, abdomen, or flank, and 
sometimes radiating to the groin, which is attrib-
utable to the AAA. Patients presenting with such 
symptoms should be admitted to an ICU for arte-
rial BP monitoring, tight BP control, medical opti-
mization, and AAA repair, ideally in 24 to 48 hours 
to reduce risk of free rupture. Other symptoms 
that warrant expedited, although not necessarily 
urgent AAA repair, include tenderness to palpation 
overlying the AAA in the abdomen, back, or flank, 
embolism (eg, blue toe syndrome) or compressive 
symptoms (eg, obstructive uropathy). Observational 
studies show that patients treated for symptomatic 
aneurysms have higher mortality and morbidity 
rates than those treated electively.7, 8 Although tim-
ing of repair of symptomatic aneurysms remains 
controversial, most studies have reported out-
comes of symptomatic aneurysms repaired during 
a patient’s index operation, with some studies find-
ing that performing surgery on a nonemergency 
basis and potentially optimizing patient’s cardiore-
spiratory status during their hospitalization may be 
advantageous.8,13-15
3. Saccular AAAs are rare and, consequently, there 
are limited natural history data. In a Dutch regis-
try of patients treated for fusiform and saccular 
AAAs, researchers found that saccular aneurysms 
appeared more common in women and were more 
likely to be symptomatic at smaller sizes than fusi-
form aneurysms. 9 Of 7 659 patients with AAA, 
6.1% had saccular AAA. Of patients with saccular 
aneurysms and acute presentation, 25% had diam-
eters <5.5 cm, and 8.4% had diameters <4.5 cm. 
In contrast, only 8.1% and 0.6% of patients with 
fusiform AAA presenting acutely had diameters 
<5.5 cm and <4.5 cm, respectively. In their 2017 
guidelines on AAA, 16 the Society for Vascular 
Recommendations for the Threshold for AAA Repair (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e399
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Surgery recommended elective repair of patients 
presenting with saccular AAA, although size guid-
ance is lacking because of limited natural history 
data. Clearly, the decision to intervene must be 
informed by the patient’s individual anatomy.
4. Pooled analysis from thousands of patients 
included in AAA surveillance studies from North 
America, Western Europe, and East Asia showed 
that, although aneurysm growth is highly variable, 
growth rates range from 1.5 mm/y to 2 mm/y for 
those with AAA of 3.0 cm to 3.9 cm and from 3.3 
mm/y to 5.7 mm/y in AAA of 4.0 cm to 5.9 cm 
at baseline.17 ,18 The 4 major trials evaluating effi-
cacy of early open and endovascular treatment of 
AAA for small aneurysms all excluded patients with 
aneurysms that grew ≥7 mm in 6 months or >10 
mm in 12 months, given concern for increased risk 
of rupture. Thus, balancing the risks, aneurysms 
with size increases of ≥0.5 cm in 6 months or ≥1 
cm in 1 year are considered to be rapidly growing 
and may warrant consideration of repair.
6.5.5.4. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of AAA
Recommendations for Open Versus Endovascular Repair of AAA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A
1. In patients with nonruptured AAA with low 
to moderate operative risk and who have 
anatomy suitable for either open or EVAR, a 
shared decision-making process weighing the 
risks and benefits of each approach is recom-
mended.1-11
1 B-NR
2. In patients undergoing elective endovascular 
repair for nonruptured AAA, adherence to 
manufacturer’s instructions for use is recom-
mended.12-16
2a B-NR
3. In patients with nonruptured AAA and a high 
perioperative risk, EVAR is reasonable to 
reduce the risk of 30-day morbidity, mortality, 
or both.9,10
2a B-NR
4. For patients with nonruptured AAA, a 
moderate to high perioperative risk, and 
anatomy suitable for an FDA-approved 
fenestrated endovascular device, endovas-
cular repair is reasonable over open repair 
to reduce the risk of perioperative compli-
cations. 10,11,17 ,18
Synopsis
Options for repair of AAA have substantially grown since 
the first description of open repair in 1952.19 In particular, 
EVAR has made it possible to treat patients who may 
have never qualified for open surgery because of signifi-
cant cardiopulmonary comorbidities, renal comorbidities, 
or both. With the abundance of options, clinicians must 
remain informed regarding empirical data that may favor 
one approach over another in a particular patient and 
consider patient preferences for surgical options when 
data support either approach. Historic RCTs evaluating 
outcomes of EVAR versus open repair showed an ini-
tial survival advantage for EVAR that dissipates at differ-
ent time intervals. 1,3-8 Contemporary investigations have 
shown a steady decline in mortality rates for EVAR in 
general20 and a much larger perioperative survival ben-
efit from EVAR versus open repair. 9 However, similar to 
historic clinical trials, these survival benefits can dissipate 
over time and must be weighed against suboptimal sur-
veillance that can occur in those treated with EVAR, lead-
ing to higher rates of late rupture and associated death.21 
For repair of juxtarenal aneurysms using FDA-approved 
fenestrated devices, available data show similar findings 
(ie, an initial survival benefit that may wane over time).10,11
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Pooled data from 7 RCTs evaluating all-cause 
death after EVAR versus open surgery for infrare-
nal AAA repair show that the risk of perioperative 
mortality is much lower in those treated with EVAR 
(OR, 0.36; 95% CI, 0.2–0.66). This advantage per-
sists at 6 months, after which survival from both 
approaches become equivalent. Moreover, after 8 
years, those treated with EVAR have a higher risk of 
aneurysm-related death (hazard ratio, 5.12; 95% CI, 
1.6–16.4), secondary intervention (hazard ratio, 2.1; 
95% CI, 1.7–2.7), aneurysm rupture (OR 5; 95% 
CI, 1.1–23.3), and death attributable to rupture (OR 
3.6; 95% CI, 1.9–6.8) compared with open repair.22 
Observational studies, such as the large propensity-
matched study evaluating EVAR and open repair in a 
Medicare population, found that the survival advan-
tage for EVAR lasted longer among older patients.9 
For complex repairs, a similar survival advantage 
is seen for fenestrated repair over complex open 
repairs in the first 30 days after surgery. More data 
are necessary to identify longer-term outcomes and 
to determine for which groups one approach may 
be more advantageous. Given the current clini-
cal equipoise, engaging the patient in a process of 
shared decision-making is recommended, as further 
detailed in Section 5, “Shared Decision-Making.”
2. Patient-specific anatomical characteristics of the 
aorta, such as neck diameter, length, and angulation, 
and iliac seal diameter, length, and vessel access, 
must all be considered in endovascular repair. Some 
observational studies show that treating aneurysms 
outside of the manufacturer’s instructions for use 
increases failure rates, resulting in increased risks 
of graft migration, endoleaks, late rupture, and 
deaths.12,13 For example, Shanzer et al12 found that 
in a multicenter retrospective study of >10 000 
patients undergoing EVAR between 1999 and 
2008, patients with AAA treated with devices off 
instructions for use had significantly higher rates 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e400
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
of sac enlargement. More recently, Herman et al 13 
found that any deviation from instructions for use 
increased risk of graft-related adverse events (haz-
ard ratio, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.05–3.1). A meta-analysis 
of 17 studies found that patients treated with non-
instructions for use higher overall mortality rates 
(hazard ratio, 1.2; 95% CI, 1.02–1.42; P =0.03).14 
Given these findings, in most patients, treating off 
instructions for use in elective AAA repair is dis-
couraged. Those who have been treated off instruc-
tions for use warrant closer follow-up because of 
higher rates of failure from endoleaks, graft migra-
tion, and late rupture.
3. EVAR-2 (UK Endovascular Aneurysm Repair 2) 
was an RCT that evaluated outcomes of EVAR in 
high-risk patients. Patients were enrolled if they 
were determined to be unfit for open surgery, with 
fitness assessed using cardiac, respiratory, and renal 
criteria.23 In these patients, the trial initially showed 
that EVAR did not improve survival compared with 
the control of no intervention; however, more than 
a decade later, those treated with EVAR had sig-
nificantly lower aneurysm-related mortality (hazard 
ratio, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.34–0.91). 24,25 Contemporary 
analyses of outcomes in high-risk patients show 
that perioperative death after EVAR has markedly 
decreased (eg, 9% in EVAR-2 versus 1.9% in the 
ACS national registry).26 Furthermore, in evaluating 
a propensity-matched Medicare population, postop-
erative complications that are more likely to affect 
high-risk patients, such as myocardial infarction, 
pneumonia, acute renal failure, and need for dialysis, 
were all significantly less likely to occur after infra-
renal EVAR compared with open repair.9 In assess-
ing which patients are “high risk” for elective AAA 
repair, risk calculators derived using data from the 
Vascular Quality Initiative and the Vascular Study 
Group of New England can be helpful in informing 
discussions with patients about repair options and 
potentially identify patients for which even EVAR 
would be of prohibitively high risk.27-29
4. Recent observational studies aimed to compare 
outcomes between open and endovascular repair 
for complex aortic aneurysms. Using propensity 
score matching, investigators found that periopera-
tive mortality rates between patients undergoing 
open repair or FEVAR were similar in those enrolled 
in the Vascular Quality Initiatives registry (4.7% ver-
sus 3.3%, respectively, P=0.17).17 Evaluating data 
from the ACS, Varkevisser et al found much higher 
odds of 30-day death from open repair compared 
with FEVAR (OR, 4.9; 95% CI, 1.4–19). 10 The risk 
of immediate postoperative complications, such as 
myocardial infarction, acute kidney injury, and the 
initiation of dialysis, is significantly higher after 
open complex repair compared with FEVAR. 11,17 ,18 
However, rates of late reintervention are higher 
after FEVAR,11,18 as are the rates of persistent renal 
impairment11 and 3-year mortality rate (excluding 
perioperative deaths) (hazard ratio, 1.7; 95% CI, 
1.1–2.6).17 Thus, similar to infrarenal repair, FEVAR 
may be most beneficial for the moderate- to high-
risk surgical candidates who are more likely to 
experience perioperative complications.
6.5.5.5. Treatment of Concomitant Common Iliac 
Aneurysms
Recommendations for the Treatment of Concomitant Common Iliac 
Aneurysms
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. For patients with asymptomatic small 
AAA and concomitant common iliac artery 
aneurysm(s) ≥3.5 cm, elective repair of both 
abdominal and iliac aneurysms is recom-
mended.1-4
1 B-NR
2. When treating common iliac artery aneu-
rysms or ectasia as part of AAA repair, 
preservation of at least 1 hypogastric 
artery is recommended, if anatomically 
feasible, to decrease the risk of pelvic 
 ischemia.5,6
Synopsis
The prevalence of common iliac artery aneurysms in the 
presence of AAA has been reported to be as high as 
20% to 40% in surveillance studies. 1,2 In patients with 
both aortic and iliac aneurysms, it is common for an iliac 
aneurysm to reach a size appropriate for elective repair 
before the AAA does. Although no randomized studies 
for iliac aneurysm repair size thresholds exist, in large 
case series and registry reports, rupture of iliac aneu-
rysms at diameters <4 cm is rare.3,7 Thus, a repair thresh-
old of 3.5 cm seems reasonable to balance procedural 
risks with rupture risk. Furthermore, to achieve adequate 
AAA repair, repair of iliac artery ectasia or aneurysms 
often may be required. Consideration of pelvic perfusion 
is of great importance when managing concomitant iliac 
disease. In such cases, there is a high risk of ischemic 
complications from exclusion of internal iliac arteries that 
can lead to buttock claudication, bowel ischemia, and 
erectile dysfunction.5,6 For some patients, adequate treat-
ment of diseased iliac arteries cannot be accomplished 
without internal iliac artery sacrifice. Thus, individualized 
treatment plans with shared decision-making are impor-
tant when treating aorto-iliac aneurysm disease.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In a large single-center case series by Huang et al,8 
438 patients with common iliac artery aneurysms 
were observed for an average of 3.7 years. Eighty-
six percent of patients had current or previously 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e401
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
treated AAA. Common iliac artery aneurysms grew 
at an average rate of 2.9 mm/y, and no iliac aneu-
rysm ≤3.8 cm ruptured. A multinational retrospective 
review of patients with internal iliac artery aneu-
rysms found that 41.7% of individuals had a con-
comitant AAA. Of 63 patients, 1 patient presented 
with a ruptured internal iliac artery aneurysm of ≤3 
cm, and 4 individuals’ iliac aneurysms ruptured at 
diameters ≤4 cm. Recently published data from the 
Dutch Surgical Aneurysm Audit showed that of the 
857 patients with treated iliac artery aneurysms, the 
median iliac artery aneurysm size at elective repair 
was 4.3 cm, while ruptured iliac aneurysms had a 
median diameter of 6.8 cm at presentation.
2. In a meta-analysis of studies reporting exclusion or 
preservation of the internal iliac artery, Kouvelos et 
al5 found an increased pooled occurrence of but-
tock claudication in those undergoing unilateral 
(27%) or bilateral (36%) internal iliac artery exclu-
sion. In a separate meta-analysis, Bosanquet et al6 
found similar rates of buttock claudication, as well 
as a 10% occurrence of erectile dysfunction in men. 
Other ischemic events, such as spinal, bowel, and 
gluteal ischemia, were rare, occurring at a rate of 
<1%.6 Another consideration in treating aorto-iliac 
disease is the risk of late intervention from growth 
of ectatic or aneurysmal iliac arteries. In a retrospec-
tive analysis of prospectively collected data, Gibello 
et al4 found that in patients with AAA undergoing 
EVAR, after a mean follow-up of 6.2 years, those 
with common iliac arteries of ≥18 mm in diameter 
had a significantly higher rate of type Ib endoleaks 
(7 .2% versus 3.2%; P=0.01) and late reinterventions 
(19% versus 11.8%; P =0.01), leading to higher 
odds of composite EVAR failure (OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 
1.2–2.7) and need for reintervention (OR, 1.9; 95% 
CI, 1.15–3.3). Hassen-Khodja et al10 and Sala et al9 
found that, after open repair of AAA, common iliac 
arteries of ≥18 mm in diameter tended to dilate over 
time, warranting consideration of bifurcated grafting 
rather than aorto-aortic tube grafting.9,10
6.5.6. Surveillance After Aneurysm Repair
6.5.6.1. Surveillance After TAA Repair
Recommendations for Surveillance After TAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients treated with TEVAR, surveillance 
imaging with CT is recommended after 1 
month and 12 months and, if stable, annually 
thereafter.1-5
2a B-NR
2. In patients treated with TEVAR, longitudinal 
surveillance with MRI is a reasonable alterna-
tive to CT for reduction of long-term radiation 
exposure or avoidance of an iodinated con-
trast allergy.6-9
2a B-NR
3. In patients treated with open repair of the 
thoracic aorta without residual aortopathy, 
surveillance imaging with a CT or MRI within 
1 year postoperatively and then every 5 years 
thereafter is reasonable.10-14
2a C-EO
4. In patients treated with open repair of the 
thoracic aorta who have residual aortopa-
thy or abnormal findings on surveillance 
imaging, annual surveillance imaging is 
 reasonable.
Synopsis
The role of surveillance imaging after thoracic aneurysm 
repair is to identify complications of the repair or monitor 
for progression of residual aortic pathology. CT is gener-
ally the preferred imaging modality for surveillance imag-
ing after TEVAR7 ,15; MRI, although generally more limited 
by metallic artifact, is a reasonable alternative. Open 
repair of the thoracic aorta is durable. 2,5,10-14 In patients 
undergoing TEVAR, there is a higher incidence of com-
plications and reintervention compared with patients 
undergoing open repair 2,4,5,10-12; TEVAR complications 
can include endoleak (see Section 2.6, “Classification of 
Endoleaks”), retrograde type A aortic dissection, stent-
graft migration, stent-graft fracture or collapse, and an 
increase in aortic size. 6,7 Complications of open repair 
that can be detected by surveillance imaging include 
graft infection and anastomotic pseudoaneurysm. 10,16 
Additionally, after both open repair and TEVAR, patients 
may develop progressive aneurysmal dilation of adjacent 
or remote aortic segments.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Use of TEVAR is associated with reintervention 
rates ranging from 7% to 23%.1,2,4,5 In the Gore TAG 
study,17 there was an 11% incidence of endoleak18 
at 30 days, 6% at 1 year, and 9% at 2-year follow-
up after TEVAR.2,17 A 6-month follow-up study may 
be useful in detecting a delayed retrograde type A 
aortic dissection.
2. MRI has some advantages over CT, including the 
avoidance of ionizing radiation and iodinated intra-
venous contrast administration.7, 8 However, MRI is 
limited by its higher cost, longer acquisition times, 
lower resolution, and limited visualization of metal-
lic stent graft components and adjacent structures. 
MRI has a potential growing role, particularly in 
patients who are middle aged or younger, in whom 
the consequences of lifelong surveillance in terms 
of contrast-induced nephropathy and cumulative 
radiation dose should be considered.9
3. Open repair for any segment of the thoracic 
aorta has proven to be durable in extended 
Recommendations for Surveillance After TAA Repair (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e402
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
follow-up.10,11,13,14,19 Treatment failure after open 
repair of either the proximal or distal thoracic aorta 
requiring reintervention ranges from 1% to 7% 
in long-term (10-year) follow-up. 10-12 In patients 
without a genetic syndrome or residual aortopathy 
shown on a postoperative imaging, surveillance 
can be done at longer intervals.
4. The appropriate frequency surveillance imaging 
in the presence of abnormal findings has neither 
been studied nor validated but, in such cases, 
annual surveillance imaging is typical. Patients 
requiring reintervention have a higher incidence of 
HTAD.10,16
6.5.6.2. Surveillance After AAA Repair
Recommendations for Surveillance After AAA Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR, 
baseline surveillance imaging with CT 
is recommended at 1 month postopera-
tively 1,2; if there is no evidence of endoleak 
or sac enlargement, continued surveil-
lance with duplex ultrasound at 12 months 
and then annually thereafter is recom-
mended. 1,3,4
2a C-LD
2. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR who 
are undergoing annual surveillance imaging 
duplex ultrasound, additional cross-sectional 
imaging with CT or MRI of the abdomen and 
pelvis every 5 years postoperatively is reason-
able.5-8
2a C-LD
3. In patients with AAA treated with EVAR and 
abnormal findings (Table 21) on any surveil-
lance duplex ultrasound, additional cross-sec-
tional imaging with CT or MRI is reasonable.9
2a C-LD
4. In patients with AAA treated with complex 
EVAR, a modified surveillance imaging plan 
that combines cross-sectional imaging and 
duplex ultrasound of target vessels is reason-
able.10,11
2a C-LD
5. In patients with AAA who have undergone 
open repair, surveillance imaging with CT or 
MRI of the abdominopelvic aorta within 1 year 
postoperatively and then every 5 years there-
after is reasonable.5,6
Synopsis
The role of routine surveillance after EVAR is to iden-
tify endoleak, sac growth, endograft migration, or endo-
graft failure. Although the initial surveillance intervals 
after EVAR were at 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months 
postoperatively to be consistent with surveillance imag-
ing intervals used in FDA-sponsored device trials, more 
recent data suggest that the 6-month interval can be 
eliminated if no concerning findings are observed on the 
1-month imaging (Table 21).1,2
CT is the gold standard for follow-up imaging after 
EVAR, but it is expensive, exposes the patient to ionizing 
radiation, and requires the use of iodinated contrast that 
is potentially nephrotoxic.12,13 Duplex ultrasound, with or 
without contrast enhancement, has been shown to be 
specific for the detection of endoleaks after EVAR 9,14 
and complex EVAR 15; however, ultrasound is limited in 
its ability to detect stent migration, fracture, or noncon-
tiguous aneurysms. MRI has high diagnostic accuracy 
for endoleaks 16 but must be accompanied by a plain 
abdominal radiograph to assess for endograft stent frac-
ture, because MRI cannot accurately visualize the metal-
lic stent struts.
The role of routine surveillance after open AAA repair 
is to prevent late aneurysm rupture and aneurysm-
related death by detecting para-anastomotic and new 
aneurysms. Para-anastomotic aneurysms can occur after 
open AAA repair as a result of anastomotic disruption, 
leading to pseudoaneurysm formation or progression of 
aneurysmal disease in the adjacent visceral aorta or iliac 
arteries.17 Patients with a history of AAA are also at risk 
of developing an aortic aneurysm in a noncontiguous 
location.18
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The incidence of late aortic rupture after EVAR is 
>5% through 8 years of follow-up.3 Significant risk 
factors for rupture include endoleak with associ-
ated aneurysm sac enlargement. 19,20 Endoleaks 
may be present for 10% to 17% of EVAR at 30 
days postoperatively. 1,2 In patients without early 
(30-day) endoleak, the incidence of new endoleak 
at 6 and 12 months postoperatively is simi-
lar.1 Earlier detection of an endoleak at 6 vs. 12 
months is not associated with improved long-term 
outcomes.1,2
2. Stent graft fracture and migration is a long-
term complication after EVAR that occurs in 
3% to 4% of patients by 4 years postopera-
tively. 7, 8 Duplex ultrasound has been shown to 
be specific for the detection of endoleaks after 
EVAR9,14,15  but is limited in its ability to detect 
stent migration, fracture, or new noncontiguous 
aneurysms.
3. Duplex ultrasound is 95% accurate for measuring 
aortic aneurysm sac diameter and 100% specific 
for the detection of type I and type III endoleaks 
Table 21. A bnormal Findings on Duplex Imaging After EVAR 
That Should Prompt Additional Imaging
Aneurysm sac enlargement
Any endoleak
Stent graft fracture
Stent graft migration
Stent graft separation
EVAR indicates endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e403
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
(Figure 11) after EVAR but is insufficient for 
detecting type II endoleaks 9 or for characteriz-
ing anatomy related to stent graft migration or 
failure.
4. Duplex ultrasound has been shown to be a useful 
modality for surveillance of target branch vessels11 
after FEVAR. However, complex EVAR involv-
ing stenting of ≥1of the renovisceral vessels is 
at higher risk of type III endoleak than standard 
EVAR10 and may benefit from routine cross-sec-
tional imaging for surveillance of fenestration sites, 
branch junctions, and adequacy of flow in the renal 
and mesenteric arteries.21
5. Para-anastomotic aneurysms after open AAA 
repair tend to occur late, with estimated incidence 
rates of 1%, 6%, and 27% to 35% at 5, 10, and 
15 years postoperatively, respectively. 5,6 Late aor-
tic aneurysms in noncontiguous arterial segments 
from the initial aortic repair have been reported in 
45% at a mean of 7 years postoperatively. 18 As a 
result, the Society for Vascular Surgery and the 
European Society of Cardiology have both recom-
mended surveillance imaging every 5 years after 
open AAA repair. 22 No data support the use of 1 
cross-sectioning imaging modality over another for 
the surveillance of para-anastomotic aneurysms 
after open AAA repair.18
7 . ACUTE AORTIC SYNDROMES
7 .1. Presentation
AAS, although uncommon, are associated with life-
threatening complications and a mortality rate as high 
as 1% to 2%/h if the AAS is not rapidly identified and 
appropriate therapy is not instituted promptly.1 The diag-
nosis of AAS can be challenging, however, because the 
presenting symptoms overlap with other more common 
emergency department complaints.Although the clas-
sic textbook description of AAS is of acute “tearing” or 
“ripping” pain, patients more commonly report the abrupt 
onset of severe “sharp” or “stabbing” pain in the chest 
or back (and sometimes abdomen), maximal at the start, 
that sometimes radiates. 2-5 Depending on the extent of 
aortic involvement, patients may present with various 
additional signs and symptoms (Table 22). Recording a 
careful history of the presenting symptoms is essential, 
as is obtaining a detailed family history of TAAs, genetic 
aortopathies, aortic dissection, or unexplained sudden 
death.
BP should be measured in both arms and both lower 
extremities, to exclude a BP differential resulting from 
an AAS. One should auscultate for the murmurs of aortic 
stenosis, perhaps indicating an underlying BAV, and AR, 
which commonly accompanies type A aortic dissection.
Table 22. Signs and Symptoms of AAS
Clinical Signs and Symptoms Cause
Asymmetric blood pressure (>20 mm Hg) between limbs Compromise of branch artery ﬂow
Bowel ischemia or gastrointestinal bleed Malperfusion of the celiac or superior mesenteric artery
Dysphagia Compression of the esophagus
Dyspnea Compression of trachea or bronchus, congestive heart failure from aortic regurgitation, or 
cardiac tamponade
Hemoptysis Vascular rupture into lung parenchyma
Hoarseness Compression recurrent laryngeal nerve
Horner’s syndrome Compression of sympathetic chain
Myocardial ischemia or myocardial infarction Coronary artery involvement by dissection or compression by aneurysm
New murmur of aortic regurgitation Incomplete aortic valve closure secondary to leaﬂet tethering by the dilated aorta or cusp 
 prolapse because of dissection into the aortic root
Oliguria or hematuria (gross) Malperfusion of 1 or both renal arteries
Paraplegia Spinal malperfusion attributable intercostal artery involvement
Lower extremity ischemia Malperfusion of iliac artery
Shock Cardiac tamponade, hemothorax, frank aortic rupture, acute severe aortic regurgitation, severe 
myocardial ischemia
Shortness of breath Pericardial effusion, congestive heart failure from acute severe aortic regurgitation, or 
 hemothorax
Stroke symptoms Carotid or vertebral artery involved
Superior vena cava syndrome Compression of the superior vena cava
Syncope Carotid artery involvement or cardiac tamponade
AAS indicates acute aortic syndrome.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e404
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7 .2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, 
Laboratory Testing)
Recommendations for AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, Laboratory 
Testing)
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with a suspected AAS, CT is rec-
ommended for initial diagnostic imaging, given 
its wide availability, accuracy, and speed, as 
well as the extent of anatomic detail it pro-
vides.1-5
2a C-LD
2. In patients with a suspected AAS, TEE and 
MRI are reasonable alternatives for initial 
diagnostic imaging.1-6
Synopsis
A plain chest x-ray is neither sufficiently sensitive nor 
specific for AAS to be used to be diagnostic, but certain 
radiographic findings (Table 23) may raise suspicion of 
aortic dissection or suggest an alternate diagnosis for 
the patient’s symptoms, in particular when there is previ-
ous radiography that shows the changes to be new in the 
interval.1,2,7 Fortunately, CT, TEE, and MRI are all highly 
accurate for the diagnosis of AAS.3 Aortography is rarely 
used given its invasive nature and significantly lower 
sensitivity than the other imaging modalities. 8 Acute 
aortic dissection risk scoring systems (eg, aortic dissec-
tion detection risk score [AAD-RS] or aorta simplified 
score [AORTAs]) can aid in the diagnostic evaluation of 
patients presenting with AAS (Table 24 and Table 25)5,9-12  
but have not been uniformly adopted. 4 No biomarkers 
are considered diagnostic, although in patients with a 
low previous probability of AAS a nonelevated D-dimer 
(<500 ng/mL) makes the diagnosis unlikely. Conse-
quently, integrating a low aortic dissection risk score and 
a low D-dimer may be a useful strategy to exclude the 
diagnosis of AAS.13
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Although the sensitivity and specify of CT, MRI, 
and TEE are all high, 3 CT has become the pre-
ferred modality for evaluating most patients with 
suspected AAS. CT is widely available at all hours 
in the emergency department and is quick to 
perform. Not only does it diagnose the underly-
ing AAS, it also shows the full extent of the dis-
section and, in some cases, the entry tear site. 
CT can detect the presence and mechanism of 
aortic branch vessel involvement as well as vessel 
patency, signs of malperfusion, pericardial effu-
sion and hemopericardium, periaortic or medi-
astinal hematoma, and pleural effusion. Use of 
electrocardiographic-synchronized CT techniques 
should be considered when there is a need to 
accurately depict mediastinal structures (eg, prox-
imal aorta, coronary ostia). When IMH is present, 
the extent and thickness of the hematoma can 
be documented and, when PAUs are present, the 
presence of and size of pseudoaneurysms can be 
easily defined.
2. In general, the choice of the initial imaging modal-
ity should be based on the patient’s history and 
clinical presentation, the specific clinical questions 
to be answered, and the institutional availability, 
Table 23. Plain Chest X-Ray Suggestive of Aortic Dissection2
Signs of Aortic Dissection on Chest X-Ray Findings
Mediastinal widening
Disruption of the normally distinct contour of the aortic knob
”Calcium sign,” which appears as a separation of the intimal calciﬁcation 
from the aortic wall of >5 mm
Double density appearance within the aorta
Tracheal deviation to the right
Deviation of the nasogastric tube to the right
Reprinted with permission from Strayer et al.2
Table 24. A ortic Dissection Detection Risk Score (ADD-RS) 
Items5,14
High-Risk 
 Conditions
High-Risk Pain  
Features
High-Risk 
 Examination 
 Features
Marfan syndrome 
or other connective 
tissue disease
Family history of aortic 
disease
Known aortic valve 
disease
Recent aortic 
manipulation
Known thoracic aortic 
aneurysm
Chest, back, or 
abdominal pain 
described as:
 Abrupt onset
 Severe in intensity
 Ripping or tearing 
in quality
Pulse deﬁcit or 
systolic blood 
pressure differential
Focal neurologic 
deﬁcit (with pain)
Murmur of aortic 
regurgitation (new, 
with pain)
Hypotension or shock 
state
For each risk category, 1 point is assigned if /g1161 risk factors are present. 
Consequently, the total ADD-RS will range from 0 to 3. An ADD-RS of 0 points 
is low risk; 1 point is moderate risk; and 2 to 3 points is high risk. Adapted with 
permission from Hiratzka et al.5 Copyright 2010, American Heart Association, 
Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Table 25. A orta Simpliﬁed Score (AORTAs)11 Pretest 
 Probability Assessment Score
Clinical Item Points
Hypotension/shock2
Aneurysm 1
Pulse deﬁcit 1
Neurologic deﬁcit1
Severe pain1
Sudden-onset pain 1
The patient is given the number of points corresponding to each clinical item 
that is positive in the patient’s presentation. The points are summed, and a total 
score of 0 to 1 point is low-probability of aortic dissection, where a total of 
/g1162 points is high probability. Reprinted with permission from Morello et al.11
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e405
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
experience, and expertise with each of the diag-
nostic imaging techniques. 6 In certain clinical cir-
cumstances, for example, patients with a history 
of an iodinated contrast reaction or patients who 
are too unstable to travel to the radiology suite, CT 
may not be preferred. Echocardiography (TEE/
TTE) is an alternative. TTE is noninvasive, can be 
performed at the bedside, and may be helpful in 
eliciting the diagnosis of AAS and quickly identify-
ing complications of AAS, such as AR or pericardial 
effusion and tamponade. TEE is preferred to TTE, 
however, because of its higher sensitivity and bet-
ter anatomic resolution; TEE can be performed at 
the bedside in the emergency department or, alter-
natively, once the patient is in the operating room. 
MRI is most commonly the third-choice modality, 
given that it is not readily available, requires skilled 
interpretation, and has longer acquisition times, as 
well as the fact it is challenging to provide clini-
cal care to potentially unstable patients while in 
an MRI scanner. Consequently, MRI is most often 
used as a follow-up imaging modality in patients in 
which there is diagnostic uncertainty. Nevertheless, 
MRI may be the study of choice in the acute set-
ting for a stable patient with a contraindication to 
iodinated contrast.
7 .3. Medical Management of AAS
7.3.1. Acute Medical Management of AAS
Recommendations for Acute Medical Management of AAS
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients presenting to the hospital with 
AAS, prompt treatment with anti-impulse 
therapy with invasive monitoring of BP with an 
arterial line in an ICU setting is recommended 
as initial treatment to decrease aortic wall 
stress.1-5
1 C-LD
2. Patients with AAS should be treated to an 
SBP <120 mm Hg or to lowest BP that main-
tains adequate end-organ perfusion, as well 
as to a target heart rate of 60 to 80 bpm.3,6
1 B-NR
3. In patients with AAS, initial management 
should include intravenous beta blockers, 
except in patients with contraindications.2,5,7
2a B-NR
In those with contraindications or intolerance 
to beta blockers, initial management with 
an intravenous non-dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blocker is reasonable for heart rate 
control.1,2,5
1 C-LD
4. In patients with AAS, initial management 
should include intravenous vasodilators if the 
BP is not well controlled after initiation of 
intravenous beta-blocker therapy.8
1 C-EO
5. Patients with AAS should be treated with pain 
control, as needed, to help with hemodynamic 
management.
Synopsis
Patients presenting with AAS need to be treated promptly to 
prevent acute and chronic complications. In all patients with 
AAS, immediate medical therapy is indicated while consider-
ing urgent surgical (in patients with type A aortic dissection), 
endovascular intervention (in patients with type B aortic dis-
section), or both; medical therapy includes aggressive heart 
rate and BP management as well as pain control. Studies 
have shown that, beyond surgical and endovascular treat-
ment, medical therapy has an important role in decreasing 
long-term aorta-related adverse events.1,4,9-11 Beta blockers 
and intravenous vasodilators are the medications most com-
monly studied for the initial treatment of patients with AAS, 
with the goal of decreasing aortic wall stress.2,8 A recent 
large study showed that angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors (ACEIs) and ARBs are beneficial in the long-term 
management of hypertension in patients with aortic dissec-
tion.5 Statins are used routinely in patients after aortic dis-
section, although the evidence is not very robust.12
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There are no randomized studies that have evalu-
ated different medical treatments in the treatment 
of AAS, although extensive clinical experience has 
established the current standard of anti-impulse 
therapy. This is usually accomplished with a com-
bination of intravenous beta blockers (eg, esmo-
lol, metoprolol, and labetalol) and vasodilators (eg, 
nicardipine, clevidipine, and sodium nitroprusside) 
with the goal of reducing both heart rate and BP to 
decrease aortic wall stress.2-5,7 ,8,11
2. Small, single-center studies have highlighted the 
importance of reducing heart rate to 60 to 80 bpm 
and SBP to <120 mm Hg. Experts believe that the 
lowest BP that does not compromise end-organ 
function should be targeted.3,11
3. Intravenous beta blockers have been the mainstay 
of acute medical treatment, and studies report-
ing benefits over the long term and emphasizing 
the importance of continuing this therapy at the 
time of hospital discharge to improve clinical out-
comes.1-3,5,7 ,9 Caution should be used in patients 
with contraindications to beta blockers (eg, acute 
AR, heart block, or bradycardia). In patients who are 
intolerant to beta blockers, intravenous non-dihy-
dropyridine calcium channel blockers (ie, verapamil 
or diltiazem) are typically used for initial treatment.2
4. Intravenous vasodilators are useful adjunctive 
therapy for intravenous beta blockers but should 
be avoided as initial treatment (before starting beta 
blockers or calcium channel blockers), given the 
potential for compensatory tachycardia.8,9
5. Pain related to AAS can trigger a rise in heart rate 
and BP, so treating the pain symptoms can help to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e406
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
control the patient’s BP and heart rate. Intravenous 
opiates are particularly efficacious in this situation. 
Intravenous nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
such as ketorolac, may not be suitable because of 
the risk of inducing hypertension as well as adverse 
renal effects.
7.3.2. Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
Recommendation for Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendation
1 B-NR
1. In patients with AAS, it is recommended to 
treat with long-term beta blockers (unless 
contraindicated) to control heart rate and BP 
to reduce late aortic-related adverse events.1-7 
Additional antihypertensive agents (particu-
larly ARBs and ACEIs) should be added, as 
necessary, to adequately control BP.
Synopsis
Patients with AAS with surgical or endovascular treat-
ment need continued and long-term medical manage-
ment. Controlling hypertension has consistently been 
shown to decrease aorta-related adverse events. Recent 
studies have shown long-term benefit with specific BP 
agents such as beta blockers, ACEIs, and ARBs.
Recommendation Supporting Text
1. Long-term oral antihypertensive regimens that 
included beta blockers, ACEIs, and ARBs have 
shown to improve long-term outcomes in patients 
with AAS treated with both surgical and endovascu-
lar treatments.1-4 Although calcium channel block-
ers showed some benefit in patients with type B 
aortic dissection, further studies in mouse models 
of Marfan syndrome as well as case control studies 
in Marfan syndrome and other inherited aortopa-
thy patients in the GenTAC (Genetically Triggered 
Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovascular 
Conditions) registry showed deleterious effects of 
long-term calcium channel blocker use and, con-
sequently, it may be best to avoid these agents in 
patients with Marfan syndrome unless necessary to 
achieve BP control.8
7 .4. Surgical and Endovascular Management of 
Acute Aortic Dissection
The primary goals of open surgical or endovascu-
lar stent-graft repair for acute aortic dissection are to 
prevent (or treat) aortic rupture, prevent retrograde 
extension of the dissection into the aortic root, prevent 
antegrade propagation of the dissection into distal yet 
undissected segments, and alleviate malperfusion syn-
dromes. Acute aortic dissection management strate-
gies are therefore “complication specific,” guided by the 
patient’s signs and symptoms, the presence or absence 
of complications, and the specific features and con-
straints of the patient’s aortic and branch vessel anat-
omy (Figure 21).
Figure 21. Acute Aortic Dissection: Malperfusion Treatment Options.
AoD indicates aortic dissection; and TEVAR, thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e407
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7.4.1. Acute Type A Aortic Dissection
7.4.1.1. Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute Type A 
Aortic Dissection
Recommendations for Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute Type A 
Aortic Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients presenting with suspected or con-
firmed acute type A aortic dissection, emer-
gency surgical consultation and evaluation 
and immediate surgical intervention is recom-
mended because of the high risk of associated 
life-threatening complications.1,2
2a B-NR
2. In patients presenting with acute type A 
aortic dissection, who are stable enough 
for transfer, transfer from a low- to a high-
volume aortic center is reasonable to improve 
survival.3,4
2a B-NR
3. In patients presenting with nonhemorrhagic 
stroke complicating acute type A aortic dis-
section, surgical intervention is reasonable 
over medical therapy to reduce mortality and 
improve neurologic outcomes.5,6
Synopsis
Acute type A aortic dissection is a life-threatening condi-
tion because of potential sequelae, including rupture that 
causes cardiac tamponade, acute severe AR that causes 
heart failure or shock, compromised coronary artery ostia 
causing myocardial ischemia, or malperfusion causing 
end-organ ischemia or infarction, all of which can all be 
fatal. Suspected or diagnosed acute type A aortic dis-
section warrants urgent surgical evaluation, because 
the mortality rate of medical management alone is 2 to 
3 times that of surgical intervention. 1 Data from IRAD 
showed that from 1995 to 2013, the surgical mortal-
ity rate decreased from 25% to 18%, while the medi-
cal mortality rate remained unchanged at 57%. Surgical 
intervention mitigates the immediate risk of aortic rup-
ture/tamponade, corrects AR and myocardial ischemia, 
and reestablishes flow to malperfused vessels.
Nevertheless, the benefits of surgery must be weighed 
against the risks of the surgery itself (ie, a demanding, 
complex operation in patients who often are physiologi-
cally compromised). Universally recognized risk factors 
that increase the surgical mortality rate include shock 
and tamponade, neurologic or visceral malperfusion, and 
preoperative myocardial ischemia. 7-9 Although age is a 
risk factor, elderly patients still benefit from surgery, with 
superior immediate and midterm outcomes compared 
with medical therapy.10,11 Short- and midterm outcomes 
can be equivalent to younger populations,12,13 with circu-
latory collapse being the primary predictor of long-term 
survival.14 In patients with significant contraindications to 
surgery, including frailty, clinical judgment may determine 
that the risk-benefit ratio favors medical management.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The potential sequelae of acute type A aortic dis-
section, including myocardial infarction, acute AR, 
cardiac tamponade, aortic rupture, and end-organ 
malperfusion, are associated with high rates of 
morbidity and mortality. Given the acuity, unpre-
dictability, and finality of such events, immediate 
evaluation for surgical intervention is warranted to 
reverse any ongoing physiologic compromise and 
mitigate the risk of fatal events. The mortality rate 
of unoperated acute type A aortic dissection is 
1%/h,15 and the time intervals between symptom 
onset, diagnosis, and surgery have a significant 
effect, with the highest mortality rate occurring 
in those undergoing surgery 8 to 12 hours after 
diagnosis.16 Patients presenting with clinical indi-
cators of severe physiologic compromise (shock, 
neurologic deficits, malperfusion, myocardial isch-
emia) mandate the most immediate consideration 
for repair as the only potential option for survival.
2. Patients with acute type A aortic dissection who 
present with hemodynamic stability have an unpre-
dictable course because of the inability to predict 
eventual rupture. Although some studies have sug-
gested that night-time surgery is associated with a 
higher mortality rate,17 ,18 other studies have shown 
no diurnal difference in outcomes,19,20 and all stud-
ies have shown no difference with weekend sur-
gery. Surgeon and center experience and resource 
availability should be considered to ensure optimal 
outcomes. Despite an inherent delay in the start 
time of surgery, transfer from low- to high-volume 
hospitals (one that performs ≥7 aortic root, ascend-
ing aorta, or transverse arch aortic dissection 
repairs per year),3 as part of regionalization of care, 
can result in significantly improved outcomes.3
3. In patients with cerebral malperfusion, survival is 
superior with surgery; in patients with acute type A 
aortic dissection and an acute stroke, the mortal-
ity rates of surgical versus medical management 
are 25% to 27% versus 76%, respectively.5,21 Even 
more strikingly, Estrera et al showed that patients 
with acute type A aortic dissection who had pre-
sented with stroke had an operative mortality rate 
of only 7% and showed no worsening of neuro-
logic status postoperatively. 6 Although their study 
and others,6,22 have emphasized the timeliness of 
the aortic repair in stroke patients, with a cutoff of 
∼5 to 10 hours (after which neurologic outcomes 
declined), Fischbein et al 23 found no association 
between postoperative neurologic improvement 
and time from onset of neurologic symptoms to 
surgery. IRAD data revealed that cerebrovascu-
lar accident and coma resolved in 84% and 79% 
of patients, respectively, despite mean times to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e408
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
surgery of 12.3 and 13.8 hours, respectively. 24 It 
should be noted, however, that in 1 recent report of 
11 patients with acute type A aortic dissection and 
complete occlusion of an internal carotid artery, all 
died from cerebral edema and herniation, regard-
less of management25; consequently, this particular 
subset of patients may not benefit from surgical 
intervention.
7.4.1.2. Management of Malperfusion
Recommendations for Management of Malperfusion
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection 
presenting with renal, mesenteric, or lower 
extremity malperfusion, it is recommended to 
proceed to immediate operative repair of the 
ascending aorta.1,2
2a C-LD
2. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection 
presenting with clinically significant mesen-
teric (celiac, SMA) malperfusion, either imme-
diate operative repair of the ascending aorta 
or immediate mesenteric revascularization via 
endovascular or open surgical intervention by 
those with this expertise before ascending 
aortic repair is reasonable.3-6
Synopsis
Imaging evidence of malperfusion is present in as 
many as 25% of patients with acute type A aortic 
dissection but should be distinguished from clini-
cal evidence of end-organ ischemia, which is often 
referred to as malperfusion syndrome (Table 26). 
Malperfusion syndrome is associated with a mortal-
ity rate of 30.5%, compared with a mortality rate of 
only 6.2% in those without malperfusion syndrome. 2 
Mortality rate correlates with the number of branch 
artery vessels involved 1 as well as the number of mal-
perfused organs. 7 The combination of pulse deficits 
(a marker of malperfusion) and hypotension should 
prompt timely interventions to reestablish vital organ 
perfusion, because early reperfusion predicts sur-
vival. 8 The traditional approach to reestablish branch 
vessel perfusion has been via central aortic repair 
(ie, at the proximal aortic tear site). However, cardiac 
and visceral malperfusion portend extremely poor 
outcomes given the high mortality rate associated 
with irreversible organ damage. More recent series 
showed potential to improve outcomes by establish-
ing end-organ perfusion using endovascular means, 
before open central aortic repair (with the timing of 
subsequent open repair decided on a case-by-case 
basis). 5,8 These procedures may be performed in a 
hybrid operating room if the requisite resources and 
personnel are available.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In the presence of malperfusion, operative mortal-
ity rate correlates with the number of malperfused 
organs. Central aortic repair as the primary strat-
egy to restore perfusion has reasonable results 
when renal malperfusion, extremity malperfusion, 
uncomplicated mesenteric malperfusion, or all of 
them is present.9 This strategy rapidly mitigates the 
risk of aortic rupture and corrects any associated 
coronary malperfusion, AR, and the sequelae of 
tamponade. After central aortic repair, any residual 
malperfusion should be assessed with secondary 
interventions, as needed.
2. Mesenteric malperfusion is one of the worst 
complications of acute type A aortic dissection, 
with an associated mortality rate of 63.2%. 1 
Consequently, such patients are often man-
aged with medical therapy alone; yet, in IRAD, 
the nearly one-third of patients with mesenteric 
ischemia who were treated without intervention 
had an in-hospital mortality rate of 95%. 10 For 
patients with acute type A aortic dissection who 
present with clinical evidence of mesenteric isch-
emia, some centers 3,4 have advocated early direct 
reperfusion strategies (whether via endovascular 
or open abdominal surgery11), before central aortic 
repair; other centers continue to advocate for the 
traditional strategy of central aortic repair first. 1,2 
Currently, data are limited to help define the best 
strategy. In IRAD, a surgical and hybrid strategy 
appears to have superior outcome to medical or 
endovascular therapy alone. An institution series 
of endovascular therapy first showed a low aortic 
repair operative mortality rate of 2.1%; however, 
only 58% of the cohort underwent open repair, 
with 24% dying from organ failure and 13% from 
aortic rupture. Moreover, an endovascular therapy 
first approach requires expertise in fenestration, 
to treat dynamic obstruction, and branch stenting, 
to treat static malperfusion. 5
Table 26. Clinical Evidence of Malperfusion (“Malperfusion 
Syndrome”)
End Organ Clinical Findings
Cardiac Electrocardiographic changes of ischemia or infarction,  
troponin elevation, myocardial dysfunction
Cerebral Stroke and neurologic deﬁcits, coma and altered mental 
status
Spinal Paraplegia
Mesenteric Abdominal pain, bowel ischemia, lactic acidosis, elevation 
of liver function test results
Renal Acute kidney injury, oliguria
Extremity Loss of pulses in /g1161 extremity, sensory or motor dysfunction
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e409
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7.4.1.3. Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type A Aortic 
Dissection
Recommendations for Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type A 
Aortic Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
Aortic Repair Strategies
1 B-NR
1. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection 
and a partially dissected aortic root but no 
significant aortic valve leaflet pathology, aortic 
valve resuspension is recommended over 
valve replacement.1-5
1 B-NR
2. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection 
who have extensive destruction of the aortic 
root, a root aneurysm, or a known genetic aor-
tic disorder, aortic root replacement is recom-
mended with a mechanical or biological valved 
conduit.6-9
2b C-LD
In selected patients who are stable, valve-
sparing root repair may be reasonable, when 
performed by experienced surgeons in a Mul-
tidisciplinary Aortic Team.10,11
1 B-NR
3. In patients with acute type A aortic dissec-
tion undergoing aortic repair, an open distal 
anastomosis is recommended to improve 
survival and increase false-lumen thrombosis 
rates.12-15
1 B-NR
4. In patients with acute type A aortic dissec-
tion without an intimal tear in the arch or a 
significant arch aneurysm, hemiarch repair 
is recommended over more extensive arch 
replacement.16-18
2b C-LD
5. In patients with acute type A aortic dissec-
tion and a dissection flap extending through 
the arch into the descending thoracic aorta, 
an extended aortic repair with antegrade 
stenting of the proximal descending thoracic 
aorta may be considered to treat malperfu-
sion and reduce late distal aortic complica-
tions.19,20
Perfusion and Cannulation Strategies
2a B-NR
6. In patients with acute type A aortic dissection 
undergoing surgical repair, axillary cannula-
tion, when feasible, is reasonable over femoral 
cannulation to reduce the risk of stroke or 
retrograde malperfusion.21,22
2a B-NR
7 . In patients with acute type A aortic dis-
section undergoing surgical repair who 
require circulatory arrest, cerebral perfusion 
is reasonable to improve neurologic out-
comes.23-25
2a B-NR
8. In patients with acute type A aortic dis-
section undergoing surgical repair, direct 
aortic26,27 or innominate artery 28 cannula-
tion with imaging guidance is reasonable 
as an alternative to femoral or axillary 
 cannulation.29-31
Synopsis
To reduce the risk of late aortic complications, surgical 
resection should include the tear site, any aneurysmal 
aorta, and the proximal-most extent of the dissection. 
A nonresected primary tear is a risk factor for reop-
eration.32 A more extensive replacement that involves 
the aortic root, arch, or both adds operative complexity, 
ischemic time, and potentially circulatory arrest time but 
may reduce the risk of future aortic dilation, aortic insuf-
ficiency, or repeat dissection. An individualized approach 
to aortic root management is based on pathology and 
general condition. Younger patients are more likely to 
have proximal extension or root involvement and may 
have greater potential for late complications, given their 
longer life expectancy. VSRR has been described with 
excellent outcomes, but long-term reoperative risk is a 
concern.33
Similarly, untreated aortic arch or descending thoracic 
aortic tissue may be at risk of aneurysmal enlargement 
and the need for reintervention, particularly with acute 
type A aortic dissection that extends into the descending 
thoracic aorta. An open distal anastomosis allows direct 
arch inspection for intimal tears and resection of the 
lesser curve of the arch (ie, hemiarch technique) with-
out increased operative death. 12,13,34 In-hospital death is 
lower with hemiarch repair than with total arch replace-
ment. Antegrade stenting of the proximal descending 
thoracic aorta may promote false-lumen thrombosis and 
positive remodeling,35-37 but long-term aortic-related data 
are scarce.
Involvement of the aortic arch by the aortic dissection 
can influence both interventional strategies and clinical 
outcomes. Various interventional approaches, such as 
extended open arch replacement (with or without a fro-
zen elephant trunk),44 hybrid techniques, or endovascular 
stenting have been described. 38-40 Aortic arch exclusion 
with emerging endovascular stents graft devices is a 
field in evolution.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Most single-center retrospective studies and 
an IRAD study found no difference in peri-
operative mortality or survival when compar-
ing root replacement with a more limited root 
repair or supracommissural replacement. 2,5,7 ,41,42 
However, a standardized and structured algo-
rithmic approach showed a mortality rate of only 
8.1% with aortic valve resuspension as the pre-
ferred approach, whenever feasible, compared 
with 23.1% with root replacement. 43 Studies on 
freedom from reoperation are mixed, 1,7 ,41,44-46 but 
2 meta-analyses have shown excellent long-
term durability of aortic valve resuspension, with 
reoperation rates 1.4% to 2.1% per patient-year 
and low thromboembolism and bleeding rates 
(1.4%/patient-year). 3,4
2. An aneurysmal root at the time of acute type A 
aortic dissection repair is at long-term risk of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e410
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
progressive root dilation, secondary aortic insuffi-
ciency, and the need for reoperation. Specifically, 
an aortic root diameter of >4.5 cm has been shown 
to be a risk factor for late reintervention.6 A valved 
conduit is one option for root replacement but, if 
the aortic valve leaflet quality is good, the aortic 
insufficiency is primarily attributable to sinus dila-
tion, and the surgeon is experienced in VSRR, a 
VSRR may be reasonable for younger patients.
3. In the development of the IRAD risk score, right 
hemiarch replacement was an independent predic-
tor for a favorable surgical outcome. 15 NORCAAD 
(Nordic Consortium for Acute T ype A Aortic 
Dissection) found that the open-distal technique 
was associated with better short- and midterm sur-
vival than the clamp-on technique, although it was 
also associated with greater rates of cerebrovas-
cular complications.12 Lawton et al14 found superior 
survival when all 3 components—no cross-clamp 
use, deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, and only 
antegrade perfusion after aortic perfusion—were 
used, compared with the absence of any of these 
components. Open distal anastomosis is also asso-
ciated with higher rates of complete false-lumen 
thrombosis.13
4. Single-institution study findings that total arch 
replacement (TAR) is safe and promotes aor-
tic remodeling 47, 4 8 have not been resulted in 
larger studies. GERAADA (German Registry for 
Acute Aortic Dissection T ype A) found a trend 
toward lower mortality rates with hemiarch ver-
sus TAR (18.7% versus 25.7%; P =0.07); higher 
rates of excessive bleeding and rethoracotomy 
in the total arch group; and, in patients without 
preoperative neurologic deficits, lower mortal-
ity rates for hemiarch than TAR (14.1% versus 
24%, respectively; P=0.02). 49 A n STS database 
study of 12 years of acute type A aortic dissec-
tion repairs showed significantly lower operative 
death with hemiarch than with TAR (16% ver-
sus 27%; P <0.001). 50 Two meta-analyses have 
found significantly lower mortality rates with 
partial compared with TAR. 16,18 Across 3 meta-
analyses, the long-term freedom from aortic 
reoperation does not appear to be necessarily 
superior with TAR. 16-18
5. Comparative data on use of antegrade stenting 
of the descending thoracic aorta in the setting of 
surgical acute type A aortic dissection repair are 
limited. In several noncomparative meta-analyses, 
the mortality rate was ∼8% to 12%, the stroke 
rate was 5% to 7%, and the SCI rate was 2% to 
3.5%.36,51,52 False-lumen thrombosis rates appear 
favorable,35 but the reintervention rate was not 
zero, and the long-term benefit for aortic reopera-
tion or aortic-related mortality remained undefined. 
In a series that included 19 patients with DeBakey 
type I acute type A aortic dissection and clinical 
malperfusion, antegrade stenting was associated 
with resolution of malperfusion in 16 patients 
(84.2%).19 In patients requiring total arch replace-
ment, a frozen elephant trunk has higher adverse 
events in acute type A aortic dissection than in 
elective repairs. The stent length should be <15 
cm and, to avoid SCI, coverage should not extend 
to T8.53
6. An STS database study 50 and 2 meta-analy-
ses21,22 have found an increased risk of stroke 
and short-term mortality with femoral compared 
with axillary cannulation. However, femoral can-
nulation is more expedient and is considered the 
primary arterial site in patients with hemodynamic 
instability mandating immediate cannulation, or 
with anatomic features precluding axillary can-
nulation. If initial femoral cannulation is required 
for these reasons, it is recommended to centrally 
canulate after the distal anastomosis has been 
completed, to maximize reestablishment of true 
lumen flow.
7 . Some form of cerebral perfusion, whether ante-
grade or retrograde, has been shown to improve 
neurologic outcomes, when compared with deep 
hypothermic circulatory arrest alone. 23 Antegrade 
cerebral perfusion is associated with both lower 
long-term mortality rates and neurologic dys-
function rates. Unilateral and bilateral antegrade 
cerebral perfusion appear to have similar out-
comes, except in cases of prolonged circula-
tory arrest (>30–50 minutes), in which case 
bilateral antegrade cerebral perfusion may be 
advantageous.24,54-56
8. Several series for surgery for acute type A aortic 
dissection have reported direct aortic cannulation 
using a TEE-guided Seldinger technique. When 
performed correctly, this technique has the benefit 
of rapid establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass 
with true lumen flow. However, when the patient 
is stable, its safety relative to axillary cannulation 
is controversial, 57 because stroke rates with this 
technique are as high as 20% in some series. 29 
Rosinski et al found that patients undergoing 
direct aortic cannulation were more hemodynami-
cally unstable and had more extended repairs; 
however, even in multivariable logistic regression, 
it was associated with a higher risk of stroke (OR, 
2.3; 95% CI, 1.05–5.1) Further, cerebral perfu-
sion by some means other than axillary perfusion 
will be required for longer circulatory arrest cases. 
Innominate artery cannulation is another option 
that provides access for antegrade cerebral perfu-
sion and appears to be safe in acute type A aortic 
dissection.58-60
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e411
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7.4.2. Management of Acute Type B Aortic 
Dissection
Recommendations for the Management of Acute Type B Aortic 
Dissection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In all patients with uncomplicated acute 
type B aortic dissection, medical therapy is 
recommended as the initial management 
strategy.1-3
1 C-LD
2. In patients with acute type B aortic dissection 
and rupture or other complications (Table 27), 
intervention is recommended.4-6
1 C-EO
In patients with rupture, in the presence of 
suitable anatomy, endovascular stent grafting, 
rather than open surgical repair, is recom-
mended.
2a C-LD
In patients with other complications, in the 
presence of suitable anatomy, the use of 
endovascular approaches, rather than open 
surgical repair, is reasonable.4-6,7
2b B-R
3. In patients with uncomplicated acute type B 
aortic dissection who have high-risk anatomic 
features (Table 28), endovascular manage-
ment may be considered.8,9
Synopsis
Although acute complicated type B aortic dissection his-
torically has been treated with open repair, endovascular 
therapy has largely supplanted open repair given lower 
morbidity and mortality rates. Additionally, optimal medi-
cal management was associated with a 30-day mortality 
rate of 10% and midterm mortality rate of approximately 
30%. The introduction of endovascular techniques has 
resulted in significantly lower morbidity and mortality 
rates when compared with optimal medical management, 
reported in small randomized trials including ADSORB 
(Acute Dissection: Stent graft OR Best medical therapy)8 
and INSTEAD (Investigation of Stent Grafts in Patients 
with T ype B Aortic Dissection)10; to date, there has not 
been a large RCT comparing open versus endovascu-
lar repair for either complicated or uncomplicated type B 
aortic dissection.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Those patients with type B aortic dissection gen-
erally have better survival than those with type A 
aortic dissection. In the acute uncomplicated set-
ting, medical management is the first mode of 
therapy for type B aortic dissection. A review of the 
IRAD database showed overall in-hospital mortal-
ity rate of 13%, with those requiring open repair 
having higher mortality rates compared with those 
managed with optimal medical management and 
percutaneous intervention (32.1% versus 9.6% 
versus 6.5%, respectively; P<0.0001). 1 Without 
intervention, risk factors for early death include 
shock, evidence of malperfusion, and age 1-3  
and can be grouped together with uncontrollable 
hypertension, pain, and continued growth or exten-
sion of the dissection as a complicated type B aor-
tic dissection.
2. Patients presenting with complicated acute type B 
aortic dissection (Table 27), or developing such fea-
tures after initial presentation, have an increased risk 
of morbidity and death, and urgent or emergency 
intervention may be required. For rupture, rapid 
coverage of the affected region of the descending 
aorta may be lifesaving and does not preclude sub-
sequent further endovascular or open repair. This 
is an important consideration in those patients with 
genetically triggered aortic diseases (eg, Marfan 
syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome). Cambria et al 11 
Table 27. Consensus Features of Complicated Acute Type B 
Aortic Dissection
Feature Comment
Aortic rupture1 This can be either free or contained (in-
cluding hemothorax, increasing periaortic 
hematoma, or both; or  mediastinal hema-
toma) and should be addressed promptly.
Branch artery occlusion and 
malperfusion2
Complete or partial occlusion of a major 
branch, with or without clinical evidence of 
ischemia; this includes visceral, renal, and 
peripheral arterial branches.
Extension of dissection3 Extension of the dissection ﬂap either 
distally or proximally (ie, retrograde type A 
dissection)
Aortic enlargement Progressive enlargement of the true, false, 
or both lumens while in the acute phase 
may require prompt intervention.
Intractable pain15
Uncontrolled hypertension15
Table 28. High-Risk Features in Uncomplicated Acute 
Type B Aortic Dissection9
High-Risk Imaging Findings
Maximal aortic diameter >40 mm
False-lumen diameter >20–22 mm
Entry tear >10 mm
Entry tear on lesser curvature
Increase in total aortic diameter of >5 mm between serial imaging studies
Bloody pleural effusion
Imaging-only evidence of malperfusion
High-Risk Clinical Findings
Refractory hypertension despite >3 different classes of antihypertensive 
medications at maximal recommended or tolerated doses
Refractory pain persisting >12 h despite maximal recommended or toler-
ated doses
Need for readmission
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e412
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
reviewed the outcomes for AAS managed with 
TEVAR compared with historic controls and found 
a 1-year survival rate of 79% for acute type B aor-
tic dissection treated endovascularly. A subsequent 
single-arm study of patients treated with TEVAR 
found a 30-day mortality rate of 8% and 1-year sur-
vival rate of 88%.4 The VIRTUE Registry investiga-
tors5 found a benefit to early intervention but with 
reintervention rates of 20% to 39%. The RESTORE 
Patient Registry had similar results. 6 Fenestration 
may be required if TEVAR alone does not correct 
the malperfusion, and visceral or renal artery stent-
ing may also be required. When intervention is an 
emergency, TEVAR has a significantly lower mor-
bidity and in-hospital mortality rates compared with 
open repair, with the greatest advantage among 
older patients.12
3. With medical management of uncomplicated type B 
aortic dissection still having a 30-day mortality rate 
of 10% and a decreased long-term survival, interest 
remains in determining if early endovascular inter-
vention might reduce the risk of downstream com-
plication or negative aortic remodeling, particularly 
in patients with high-risk features. In the ADSORB 
trial,8 which compared optimal medical manage-
ment vs. optimal medical management plus TEVAR, 
there were no early deaths in either group and, 
at 1-year follow-up, there was just 1 death in the 
TEVAR group. TEVAR was superior to optimal medi-
cal management alone with significant differences 
in incomplete or no false-lumen thrombosis, aortic 
dilation, and rupture, but the primary clinical benefits 
are unknown. In the INSTEAD-XL (Investigation of 
Stent-grafts in Aortic Dissection) trial,13 in patients 
with uncomplicated type B aortic dissection, prophy-
lactic TEVAR plus optimal medical was associated 
with improved 5-year aorta-specific survival and 
delayed disease progression. As the long-term mor-
tality rate for type B aortic dissection that is managed 
medically and is strongly related to aortic events, the 
findings from the ADSORB and INSTEAD-XL trials 
appear promising, but larger trials with longer-term 
data are still needed. What remains unknown is the 
optimal timing for TEVAR. 14 Features associated 
with an increased need for future intervention are 
summarized in Table 28.9
7 .5. Management of IMH
Recommendations for Management of IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with complicated (Table 29) acute 
type A or type B aortic IMH, urgent repair is 
recommended.1-3
1 B-NR
2. In patients with uncomplicated acute type A 
IMH, prompt open surgical repair is recom-
mended.1,4-6
2b C-LD
In selected patients with uncomplicated acute 
type A IMH who are at increased operative 
risk and do not have high-risk imaging features 
(Table 30), an initial or expectant approach of 
medical management may be considered.6-12
1 B-NR
3. In patients with uncomplicated acute type B 
IMH, medical therapy as the initial manage-
ment strategy is recommended.1-3,13
2a C-LD
4. In patients with type B IMH who require repair of 
the distal aortic arch or descending thoracic aorta 
(zones 2-5) and have favorable anatomy, endo-
vascular repair is reasonable when performed by 
surgeons with endovascular expertise.2,14
2a C-LD
5. In patients with type B IMH who require repair 
of the distal aortic arch or descending tho-
racic aorta (zones 2-5) and have unfavorable 
anatomy for endovascular repair, open surgical 
repair is reasonable.2,3
2b C-LD
6. In patients with uncomplicated type B IMH 
and high-risk imaging features (Table 30), 
intervention may be reasonable.13-16
Synopsis
Aortic IMH is a distinct pathologic entity from aortic 
dissection and PAU. It is characterized by hemorrhage 
within the media of the aortic wall and may occur with or 
without intimal disruption. Radiographically, IMH appears 
as a high-attenuation crescentic or circumferential thick-
ening of the aorta on noncontrast imaging, with absence 
of blood flow through a false lumen on contrast imaging. 
IMH occurs more commonly in the descending thoracic 
aorta (60%) than in the ascending aorta (30%) or aortic 
arch (10%). 1 Classification is the same as is used for 
acute aortic dissection. Symptoms at presentation are 
similar to aortic dissection, but patients tend to be older 
and more often have hypertension and atherosclero-
sis.1,2 Malperfusion can occur but less frequently than in 
aortic dissection.1,2 IMH can progress to aortic enlarge-
ment, aortic dissection, or aortic rupture; alternatively, 
the hematoma can sometimes be resorbed.3 Of patients 
presenting with AAS, the proportion who have IMH var-
ies based by region, with reports of 6% to 23% in North 
America and Europe1,6 versus 26% to 44% in Asia.4,5,12
Table 29. F eatures of Complicated IMH
Feature
Malperfusion
Periaortic hematoma
Pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade
Persistent, refractory, or recurrent pain
Rupture
IMH indicates intramural hematoma.
Recommendations for Management of IMH (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e413
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
The management strategy for IMH balances patient 
comorbidities, the differing lethality of type A and type B 
IMH, mortality and death associated with open or endo-
vascular repair in the different segments of the aorta, 
and the risk of aortic-related complications with medical 
management. Prospective randomized comparative stud-
ies are lacking, and most series and registries are limited 
by small sample sizes. For recommendations regarding 
management of IMH in association with PAU, see Sec-
tion 7 .6, “Management of Penetrating Atherosclerotic 
Ulcer (PAU).”
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. IMH, especially type A IMH, can be a lethal condi-
tion, complicated by rupture at presentation in 18% 
and, in that setting, associated with 100% mortality 
rate without surgical intervention.3 The features of 
complications of IMH are summarized in Table 29.
2. A nonoperative strategy for type A IMH is associ-
ated with a mortality rate as high as 40%, according 
to the findings of the IRAD. 1 Progression to aortic 
dissection, rupture, or other aorta-related adverse 
events occurs in 14% to 37% of patients, with 
most events occurring within the acute or subacute 
phase.12,17 ,18 In-hospital mortality (1%–27%)1,4,6 and 
mid- and long-term survival4-6 after operative repair 
for type A IMH are reasonable and comparable to 
or better than survival rates reported for type A aor-
tic dissection. There are varied approaches to tim-
ing of surgery, with low mortality rate achieved with 
strategies of repair within 24 hours 5 and slightly 
delayed repair (between 24 and 72 hours), when 
feasible.6 The slight delay may confer an advantage 
by allowing the hematoma to form and the tissue 
quality of the aorta to improve. In addition, the extra 
time can allow for further diagnostic evaluation, 
optimization of comorbidities, or clearance of novel 
oral anticoagulant medications, which may improve 
outcomes. Delay is only reasonable in stable 
patients. The experience with successful medical 
management of type A IMH is mostly from Japan, 
Korea, and China, all reporting outcomes better 
than those reported in North America and Europe; 
the differences might be related to genetic or envi-
ronmental factors that affect IMH natural history, 
so the Asian results may not be generalizable to 
other ethnic or geographic patient populations. 
The approach varies from initial medical manage-
ment with planned “timely” (ranging from within a 
few days to before discharge) surgery to expect-
ant medical management with surgical intervention 
only for complications or disease progression. 7-12 
One meta-analysis showed acceptable pooled pro-
portion of an all-cause in-hospital mortality rate of 
7% and 30-day mortality rate of 15% 8 with ini-
tial medical management. Another meta-analysis, 
comparing upfront surgery to initial medical man-
agement with “timely” surgery, showed no signifi-
cant difference in short-term survival (although an 
overall operative approach to type A IMH did show 
a survival benefit over medical therapy alone).9 For 
patients at increased operative risk (eg, advanced 
age, poor baseline renal function, coronary artery 
disease), medical management may therefore be 
an option. There are several high-risk imaging fea-
tures (Table 30) that predict poor outcome (death, 
need for surgical intervention, or both) with this 
strategy. Shared decision-making with the patient 
should include discussion regarding need for an 
extended hospital stay of 2 to 3 weeks, including 
≥3 days in the ICU on bedrest, with perhaps ≥5 
CTAs during the hospitalization for close monitor-
ing because of the dynamic disease process and 
moderate to high risk of progression to aortic dis-
section and rupture.
3. T ype B IMH may have a more benign prognosis 
than type A IMH, resulting in relatively low in-
hospital mortality rate (4%–6%) with medical 
management and 9% mortality rate at 1-year fol-
low-up.1,2 A strategy of medical management for 
type B IMH with surgical intervention for severe 
Table 30. High-Risk Imaging Features of IMH
For Type A IMH For Type B IMH
Maximum aortic diameter >45–50 mm18,20 Maximum aortic diameter >47–50 mm15,20
Hematoma thickness /g11610 mm4 Hematoma thickness /g11613 mm15
Focal intimal disruption with ulcer-like projection involving ascending aorta 
or arch18,21
Focal intimal disruption with ulcer-like projection involving the descending 
thoracic aorta if it develops in acute phase15,16
Pericardial effusion on admission18 Increasing or recurrent pleural effusion19,22
For Both Type A and Type B IMH
Progression to aortic dissection19
Increasing aortic diameter21,22
Increasing hematoma thickness21,22
IMH indicates intramural hematoma.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e414
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
recurrent symptoms or radiographic worsening on 
follow-up was associated with acceptable long-
term survival. 3 Intervention, whether surgical or 
endovascular, has associated mortality and mor-
bidity. Although significantly less dissection and 
rupture may be observed during follow-up with 
TEVAR, compared with optimal medical therapy, 
this may17 or may not 13,14 translate into improved 
aortic-related outcomes.
4. Literature supporting endovascular treatment of 
IMH is limited mainly to experience with TEVAR 
for IMH in the setting of PAU, or TEVAR for mixed 
type B AAS including IMH; the perioperative mor-
tality rate for treatment of acute IMH ranges from 
0% to 29%. Of note, in PAU with IMH or IMH with 
ulcer-like projection, endovascular treatment can 
be guided by the focal lesion. IMH with multiple 
ulcer-like projections may require more extensive 
treatment length. Favorable anatomy for TEVAR 
would include ideally normal aorta at both proximal 
and distal landing zones or, at least at the proxi-
mal landing zone, as outward tension of the stent 
graft transferred to abnormal aortic wall can lead 
to stent-induced new entry tear and subsequent 
aneurysmal degeneration or aortic dissection. In 
general, stent graft oversizing usually does not 
exceed 10%, and balloon aortoplasty at the land-
ing zones is avoided. The experience with TEVAR 
for retrograde type A IMH associated with a distal 
intimal defect (ie, distal arch or descending tho-
racic aorta) is limited to small case reports and 
series. With the higher incidence of atherosclerotic 
disease in patients with IMH compared with aortic 
dissection, adequate vessel diameter for endovas-
cular access should be determined as well.
5. In the IRAD experience for type B IMH, open sur-
gical repair was performed in 5%, endovascular 
repair in 7%, and a hybrid approach in 1%, with no 
difference in results. 1 Good outcomes have been 
reported for open repair,3,19 despite the more inva-
sive approach. Open surgical repair may be pref-
erable when IMH extends to the proximal landing 
zone of anticipated endovascular coverage, the 
aortic diameter at the proximal or distal extent of 
planned coverage is too large to accommodate 
existing stent graft sizes, the hematoma or aneu-
rysm extends into the aortic arch and circulatory 
arrest would facilitate resection of diseased aorta, 
or endovascular access for stent deployment is 
anticipated to be inadequate.
6. High-risk imaging features may be present on 
admission or may develop in the acute, subacute, 
or chronic phases. Ulcer-like projections and 
focal intimal disruption (FID) are both terms that 
describe a focal outpouching of contrast arising 
from the lumen of the aorta in the setting of IMH 
with no associated atherosclerotic plaque. FID 
is more specifically defined by its communicat-
ing orifice measuring >3 mm, while tiny intimal 
disruption has a communicating orifice ≤ 3 mm.15 
FID occurs in 32% of type B IMH and signifi-
cantly predicts cardiovascular- or aorta-related 
death and aorta-related events, 15,16,18 especially 
when it develops in the acute, rather than chronic, 
phase.15 Tiny intimal disruptions are lower risk and 
considered a benign finding.16 As 40% of patients 
can develop FID that was not present on the ini-
tial study, 15 early surveillance imaging can help 
identify patients at risk for complications. Table 
30 summarizes these and other high-risk imaging 
features of IMH.
7 .6. Management of PAU
7.6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both
Recommendations for PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR 1. In patients with PAU of the aorta with rupture, 
urgent repair is recommended.1-3
1 B-NR
2. In patients with PAU of the ascending aorta 
with associated IMH, urgent repair is recom-
mended.1-3
2a C-LD
3. In patients with PAU of the aortic arch or 
descending thoracic aorta with associated 
IMH, urgent repair is reasonable.1-3
2b C-LD
4. In patients with PAU of the abdominal aorta 
with associated IMH, urgent repair may be 
considered.4
Synopsis
A PAU is an atherosclerotic lesion of the aorta with 
ulceration that penetrates the internal elastic lamina and 
allows hematoma formation within the media of the aor-
tic wall.5 PAUs may progress to AAS with IMH formation, 
aortic dissection, or rupture. 1,2,6 PAU with IMH is asso-
ciated with a high risk of short-term disease progres-
sion,1 particularly when localized to the ascending aorta 
(ie, Stanford type A). 1,2 Data on outcomes for PAU with 
descending thoracic and abdominal aorta (ie, Stanford 
type B) IMH are limited to small retrospective reviews 
but suggest significant early disease progression among 
patients treated with medical management.1,2 PAUs tend 
to affect elderly patients with severe atherosclerotic dis-
ease and other comorbidities that put them at high sur-
gical risk even with endovascular interventions, so the 
risk of repair must be weighed against the risk of severe 
morbidity and patient life expectancy when making deci-
sions about appropriate management.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e415
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. PAU with rupture that is not treated with interven-
tion is associated with a high mortality rate (of 5 of 
17 patients who presented with PAU with rupture 
who did not undergo repair, none survived).3 In con-
trast, in 1 small series, most patients with PAU with 
rupture treated by open or endovascular therapy 
survived to hospital discharge.1
2. PAU of the ascending aorta is uncommon; how-
ever, when it occurs, and in concert with IMH, the 
incidence rate of rupture is 33% to 75%, 2,3 and 
progression to aortic dissection is associated with 
a high mortality rate.1
3. PAUs with type B IMH that are managed conser-
vatively are associated with a high risk of disease 
progression to true aortic dissection or rupture.1,2 In 
a small retrospective analysis of patients present-
ing with PAUs and type B IMH, 3 of 17 patients 
(17 .6%) who were managed conservatively died 
from progression of disease to aortic rupture at a 
mean of 9.3 days. 1 In contrast, there was 1 death 
among 14 patients (7 .1%) who underwent open 
(n=8) or endovascular (n=6) aortic repair for PAU 
with type B IMH. 1 These data support early inter-
vention of PAU in the setting of type B IMH in 
patients who are reasonable surgical candidates.
4. The natural history of PAU of the abdominal aorta 
with associated IMH is not well described, but 
low procedure-related and 30-day mortality rates 
have been described in several small series and 
case reports of both the endovascular and surgical 
treatment of abdominal aorta PAUs.7 In a literature 
review of 298 published cases of PAU affecting the 
abdominal aorta, most authors (62.0%) reported 
endovascular stent graft repair as the treatment of 
choice, followed by open surgical repair (35.4%) 
and conservative management (2.6%).7
7.6.2. Isolated PAU
Recommendations for Isolated PAU
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with isolated PAU who are symp-
tomatic and have persistent pain that is clini-
cally correlated with the radiologic findings, 
repair is recommended.1-3
2b C-LD
2. In patients with isolated PAU who are asymp-
tomatic but have high-risk imaging features 
(Table 31), elective repair may be consid-
ered.1,2,4
Synopsis
Isolated PAUs are those without associated IMH, aortic 
dissection, or saccular aneurysm. Symptomatic isolated 
PAUs may herald a developing peri-ulcer hematoma, 
IMH, or both and are more likely to progress or result 
in rupture than asymptomatic PAUs. 5 For patients who 
present with a symptomatic PAU but whose symptoms 
resolve with goal-directed therapy or patients who are 
poor operative candidates at increased risk for morbidity 
and death from repair, medical management has been 
pursued, with early and frequent surveillance imaging to 
assess for disease progression.4
Asymptomatic isolated PAUs are increasingly diag-
nosed incidentally because of the increasing use of CTA. 
Several series that reported mid or long-term outcomes 
of retrospective institutional data suggest that isolated 
PAUs have radiographic progression in up to 30% of 
patients.1-3,6,7 High-quality data evaluating thresholds for 
surgical repair are limited, but retrospective data have 
shown that PAUs with a diameter of ≥13 mm to 20 mm 
Table 31. High-Risk Imaging Features of PAUs
Feature
Maximum PAU diameter /g11613–20 mm1
Maximum PAU depth /g11610 mm1
Signiﬁcant growth of PAU diameter or depth
PAU associated with a saccular aneurysm5
PAU with an increasing pleural effusion1
PAU indicates penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer.
Figure 22. Dimensions of Penetrating Atherosclerotic Ulcers.
(A) Maximal aortic diameter at ulcer site diameter (from ulcer across 
to opposite aortic wall). (B) Depth of intramural blood pool. (C) Length 
of intimal defect at ulcer site. (D) Width of intramural blood pool. 
Adapted from Gifford et al,11 Copyright 2016, with permission from 
Elsevier, Inc., and from Cho et al‚9 Copyright 2004 with permission 
from the Society for Vascular Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e416
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
or depth of ≥10 mm (Figure 22) are closely associated 
with disease progression. 1 Significant growth rates are 
not well defined and depend on the size of the patient, 
his or her aortic anatomy, and the presence of high-risk 
features associated with PAU (Table 31).
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Symptomatic PAUs are associated with a high risk 
of early disease progression.2,3,5,7 ,8 In a small series 
of 25 patients presenting with symptomatic PAU 
managed medically, 30% had disease progression 
on surveillance imaging at a mean of 18 months 
follow-up, including expansion of the PAU and 
new IMH in 20% and conversion to aortic dissec-
tion in 10%.3 All patients in the series went on to 
require operative repair. In contemporary series, 
most patients with symptomatic PAU without rup-
ture have been treated with open or endovascular 
repair with acceptable results (see Section 7 .6.3, 
“PAU: Open Surgical Repair Versus Endovascular 
Repair”).3,7-9
2. Asymptomatic isolated PAU with large diameter or 
depth, significant growth on surveillance imaging, 
or other high-risk features (Table 31), are associ-
ated with disease progression. 1,7 In contrast, inci-
dental aortic PAUs that are asymptomatic and 
without high-risk features have a low risk of pro-
gression (3.6% and 6.5% at 5 and 10 years after 
diagnosis, respectively). 10 Maximum depth and 
diameter of the PAU can be used to determine 
lesions that would be considered high risk and may 
be considered for intervention (Figure 22).4
7.6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus 
Endovascular Repair
Recommendations for PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus Endovascular 
Repair
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients who require repair of a PAU 
in the ascending aorta or proximal aortic 
arch (zones 0-1), open surgical repair is 
 recommended.
2a C-LD
2. In patients who require repair of a PAU in 
the distal aortic arch (zones 2-3), descend-
ing thoracic aorta, or abdominal aorta, either 
open surgical repair1-3 or endovascular repair 
is reasonable, based on anatomy and medical 
comorbidities.4-6
Synopsis
Operative repair of PAUs includes both open and endo-
vascular treatment. Historically, most PAUs were treated 
with open aortic replacement, although more contem-
porary series have reported good technical success and 
short- and midterm outcomes after endovascular repair 
in the descending and infrarenal aorta. 4-7 Comparative 
data are limited about the best treatment approach for 
a PAU but, in general, the approach depends on the 
location of the PAU, the patient’s aortic and branch ves-
sel anatomy, associated pathology, and patient comor-
bidities (because these patients tend to be older and 
have significant atherosclerosis). 4 Procedure-related 
and in-hospital death are lower for patients treated with 
an endovascular approach, although available data are 
based on small studies with a high risk of treatment 
bias.4 Midterm outcomes after endovascular repair of 
PAU have shown a 4% to 8% risk of endoleak 4,7 and 
a 5% risk of new PAU formation. 7 One-year mortality 
rates for patients treated with endovascular versus open 
repair are similar.7
Results of open surgical repair in patients with 
ascending aortic PAU are limited to small case series.8-11 
Despite this, open repair remains the gold standard for 
treating AAS that involve the ascending aorta and proxi-
mal arch, with acceptable morbidity and mortality rates 
compared with medical therapy.12,13
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Results of open surgical repair of the ascend-
ing aorta and proximal arch can be reasonably 
applied to PAU. Cases have been reported in 
which ascending aortic stenting has been per-
formed with surgeon-modified stent-grafts or 
off-label use of commercially available devices, 
but currently there is no FDA-approved device 
for endovascular repair of the ascending aorta or 
proximal arch.
2. The risk of procedure-related and in-hospital 
death is lower for endovascular compared with 
open repair of PAU in the descending thoracic and 
abdominal aorta, although longer-term data are 
similar for both operative approaches.4
7 .7 . Traumatic Aortic Injury
7.7.1. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic 
Thoracic Aortic Injury (BTTAI)
7.7.1.1. Initial Management of BTTAI in the Emergency 
Department
Recommendations for Initial Management of BTTAI in the Emergency 
Department
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. In patients with BTTAI, management and 
treatment at a trauma center with the facili-
ties and expertise to treat aortic pathology is 
recommended.
1 C-LD
2. In patients with BTTAI, anti-impulse therapy 
to reduce the risk of injury extension and 
rupture should be implemented, except in 
patients with hypotension or hypovolemic 
shock.1,2
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e417
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Synopsis
BTTAI, although rare, is the second-most common cause 
of death in trauma patients; it results from high decelera-
tion forces and is often associated with concomitant inju-
ries. In the ACS National Trauma Databank, the diagnosis 
of BTTAI increased 196.8% from 2003 to 2013, likely 
attributable to more sensitive imaging.3 The mortality rate 
of patients with BTTAI who were treated in the emer-
gency department was ∼19%.4,5 Initial management of 
polytrauma at trauma centers follows Advanced Trauma 
Life Support protocols. However, for patients with BTTAI, 
special attention to BP and heart rate is warranted 
because of their effects on injury extension and rupture.
In stable patients, the 2011 Society for Vascular 
Surgery clinical practice guidelines 6 suggested urgent 
(<24 h) repair barring other serious concomitant non-
aortic injuries or immediately after treatment of other 
injuries. Optimal timing of intervention, however, remains 
unclear. In a recent study from the National Trauma Data 
Bank, early (<24 h) repair had increased odds of death 
(adjusted OR, 2.39; 95% CI, 1.01–5.67; P=0.047). 7 A 
multicenter study showed worse adjusted mortality rate 
with early repair overall (adjusted OR, 7 .78; 95% CI, 
1.69–35.70; adjusted P=0.008) although, in subgroup 
analysis, mortality rate differences only trended toward 
favoring delayed repair (P>0.05).8
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients with BTTAI are at elevated risk of aortic-
related and overall mortality. Because of the acuity 
of injury and severity of concomitant polytrauma, 
expertise in aortic imaging and treatment at the 
treating facility is paramount to improve outcomes. 
Further, most patients will benefit from care at a 
level 1 trauma center with multidisciplinary expertise 
in treating concomitant injuries, although the risk of 
delayed treatment because of transport time must be 
weighed against the benefits of immediate treatment.
2. Although no randomized trials exist, historical lit-
erature shows that aortic rupture occurs in ∼12% 
of patients with BTTAI who were awaiting repair 
without medical management; small studies using 
protocols of beta blockers as first-line therapy 
have reported rates of 0% rupture while awaiting 
repair.1,2 In the acute trauma setting, hypovolemia 
may result in permissive hypotension, obviating 
the need for administering anti-impulse medica-
tions (typically intravenous beta blockers with or 
without supplemental intravenous vasodilators [eg, 
nicardipine, clevidipine, sodium nitroprusside]) to 
decrease aortic wall stress. Conversely, permis-
sive hypotension may not be tolerated with other 
concomitant injuries, in which adequate end-organ 
perfusion requires higher BPs.
7.7.1.2. Approach to the Initial Management of BTTAI
Recommendations for Approach to the Initial Management of BTTAI
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with grade 1 BTTAI (Figure 23), 
nonoperative management and follow-up 
imaging are recommended.1,2
1 C-LD
2. In patients with grade 3 to 4 BTTAI (Figure 
23) and nonprohibitive comorbidities or inju-
ries, aortic intervention is recommended.1,3
2a C-LD
3. In patients with grade 2 BTTAI (Figure 23) and 
with high-risk imaging features (Table 32), aortic 
intervention is reasonable.3,4
2b C-LD
4. In patients with grade 2 BTTAI (Figure 23) 
and without high-risk imaging features 
(Table 32), nonoperative management and 
follow-up surveillance imaging may be 
 reasonable.3,4
Synopsis
The most common site of BTTAI is the aortic isthmus, 
because of its site as transition from the unfixed aor-
tic arch to the fixed descending thoracic aorta and the 
relatively lesser tensile strength of this region. Other 
Figure 23. Classification System for BTTAIs.
Aortic injuries are classified according to severity, based on the findings of diagnostic imaging. Grade 1, intimal tear. intimal flap, or both. Grade 2, 
intramural hematoma. Grade 3, aortic wall disruption with pseudoaneurysm. Grade 4, aortic wall disruption with free rupture. BTTAI indicates blunt 
traumatic thoracic aortic injury. Adapted from Azizzadeh et al,2 Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier, Inc. and the Society for Vascular Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e418
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
segments that may be involved include the proximal 
ascending aorta (8%–27%), aortic arch (8%–18%), and 
distal descending thoracic aorta (11%–21%). The most 
widely used grading scale is that proposed by Estrera 
et al and endorsed by the SVS clinical practice guide-
line (Figure 23).1,2 In Estrera’s original paper, all patients 
with grade 1 injuries were managed medically and had a 
0% mortality rate. 2 Current SVS guidelines recommend 
expectant management of grade 1 injuries and repair of 
all other grades. 1 Trauma studies have found that 32% 
of BTTAIs are managed nonoperatively,3 with an associ-
ated mortality rate of 25%. 5 Overall mortality rate was 
significantly higher in nonoperatively managed patients 
(35.0% versus 11.2%; P<0.001), while aortic-related 
mortality rate was similar (9.8% versus 5.0%; P=0.119).3
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text: 
Management
1. The decision for nonoperative versus opera-
tive management of BTTAI includes complex and 
dynamic factors such as the patient’s stability, 
concomitant injuries, and potential imaging char-
acteristics that may predict aortic stability. Grade 1 
BTTAIs are likely to resolve and are associated with 
extremely low aortic-related death. Medical man-
agement and follow-up imaging to ensure resolu-
tion is appropriate.1,2
2. Grade 3 and 4 BTTAIs are at high risk of pro-
gression and rupture and should be treated in an 
urgent manner. In grade 3 injuries, nonoperative 
management was an independent predictor of all-
cause death (OR, 29.65; 95% CI, 5.62–15.649; 
P<0.0001), and imaging characteristics did not 
predict aortic-related death.4
3. Although injury grade was an independent predic-
tor of aortic-related death, outcomes of grade 1 
and 2 injuries were similar between nonoperative 
management and TEVAR, including in-hospital 
and aortic-related death (P>0.05).3 A high-volume 
center reported no differences in mortality rates or 
aortic-related mortality rates between nonopera-
tive and operative management of grade 1 and 2 
injuries.4
4. Findings of secondary signs of injury and multiple 
secondary signs are more common in patients with 
higher-grade of aortic injury and may prompt stron-
ger consideration for operative intervention. 6 The 
presence of aortic arch hematoma of >15 mm in 
thickness was predictive of death.7
7.7.1.3. Endovascular Versus Open Surgical Repair
Recommendation for Endovascular Versus Open Surgical Repair
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with BTTAI who meet indica-
tions for repair and with appropriate anat-
omy, TEVAR is recommended over open 
repair. 1-3
Synopsis
Endovascular therapy for BTTAI has become the pre-
dominant approach. From 2007 to 2015, rates of open 
repair decreased from 7 .5% to 1.9%, while rates of 
TEVAR increased from 12.1% to 25.7%.2
No randomized trials for open versus endovascular man-
agement have been conducted.4 Rather, trauma registry 
data and meta-analyses have shown that, in patients with 
suitable anatomy, TEVAR offers superior 30-day mortality 
rates and lower rates of SCI and acute kidney injury. Con-
comitant injuries may prompt concern over procedural use 
of heparin, and the use of periprocedural heparin should be 
balanced against the overall bleeding risk for each patient. 
In a small study of TEVAR in patients with predominantly 
grade 3 BTTAI, there were no differences in bleeding, throm-
boembolism, or mortality rates between use of full heparin, 
low-dose heparin, and no heparin, although patients who 
received full heparin underwent repair at a time interval 3 
times longer than did those who received no heparin.5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Compared with open repair, endovascular treatment 
of BTTAI is associated with improved procedural and 
30-day mortality rates, as well as postoperative com-
plications, including SCI and acute kidney injury.1-3,6 
In a meta-analysis of 17 retrospective studies, 
TEVAR was associated with lower procedural and 
30-day mortality rates (OR, 0.31 and 0.44, respec-
tively) and postoperative paraplegia (OR, 0.32). 1 
Murad et al showed similar reductions in mortality 
(relative risk, 0.61) and SCI (relative risk, 0.34) in 
139 studies encompassing 7768 patients.3 Studies 
using the National Trauma Data Bank, a multicenter 
registry of trauma centers, also have identified sig-
nificantly improved mortality rates, shorter ICU and 
shorter hospital stay, and lower rates of acute kidney 
injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome2,6 for 
TEVAR compared with open repair.
Table 32. High-Risk Imaging Features of BTTAI
Posterior mediastinal hematoma >10 mm8
Lesion to normal aortic diameter ratio >1.48
Mediastinal hematoma causing mass effect6
Pseudocoarctation of the aorta6
Large left hemothorax6
Ascending aortic, aortic arch, or great vessel involvement9
Aortic arch hematoma7
BTTAI indicates blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e419
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
7.7.2. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic 
Abdominal Aortic Injury (BAAI)
Recommendations for Initial Management of BAAI
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with grade 1 to 2 BAAI 
(Table 33) without malperfusion, anti-
impulse therapy, if clinically tolerated, and 
repeat imaging within 24 to 48 hours of the 
initial scan is recommended to reduce risk of 
injury progression. 1
1 C-LD
2. In patients with grade 4 BAAI (Table 33), 
repair should be performed to address life-
threatening aortic injury.2-4
2a C-LD
3. In patients with grade 2 BAAI (Table 33) and 
associated malperfusion, it is reasonable to 
consider repair.1
2a C-LD
4. In patients with BAAI, treatment with either 
endovascular or open repair is reasonable 
and depends on degree of injury, aortic 
anatomy, and the patient’s overall clinical 
status.1-4
2b C-LD
5. In patients with grade 3 BAAI (Table 33), 
it may be reasonable to consider repair to 
reduce risk of progression to life-threatening 
injury.5
3: Harm B-NR
6. In patients with BAAI, the usefulness 
of routine application of resuscitative 
endovascular balloon occlusion of the 
aorta (REBOA) for hemorrhage control 
is unclear and, in some cases, may cause 
harm. 6-8
Synopsis
BAAI represents a rare traumatic entity, occurring in <1% 
of patients with blunt trauma. Patients with BAAI often 
have concomitant injuries such as rib fractures, abdomi-
nal visceral injury, and cardiac complications that will 
affect treatment decisions. Similar to BTTAI, abdominal 
aortic injuries are graded based on aortic contour defects, 
and this grading can be used to provide a framework 
for treatment and determination of risk of major morbid-
ity and death from injuries (Table 33). Because BAAI is 
rare and symptoms are wide ranging, patients should 
be managed on an individual basis. In general, patients 
with grade 1 aortic injuries can likely be managed with 
antihypertensive therapy, beta blockade, and antiplatelet 
therapy, if not contraindicated, with repeat scan at 24 to 
48 hours. Grade 2 injuries can similarly be managed non-
operatively but may progress to include end-organ ves-
sel thrombosis or rupture. Grade 3 injuries may benefit 
from endovascular treatments if anatomically amenable. 
Grade 4 injuries are more likely to present with refractory 
hypotension, warranting rapid control of hemorrhage, 
which may be done in the emergency department (eg, 
antero-lateral thoracotomy with aortic cross-clamping) or 
operating room. Whether open or endovascular means 
are used for BAAI repair will depend on patient’s clinical 
status, hospital resources, and practitioner experience. 
Additionally, Shalhub et al 1 propose using aortic injury 
zone categorization when considering options for repair, 
which differ from traumatic abdominal zones of injury 
(Figure 24). Specifically, in their multicenter experience, 
some zone 2 and 3 injuries could be managed endovas-
cularly while no zone 2 injuries were managed this way. 
Lastly, data on the use of REBOA for hemorrhage below 
the diaphragm, not performed in the operating theater, 
and without fluoroscopic guidance are mixed, with few 
data showing survival benefit and some trauma registry 
data showing harm.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Because BAAI is very rare, in an effort to provide 
clinical evidence for the management of BAAI, 
Shalhub et al 1 aggregated data from 12 trauma 
centers. In the authors’ experience in treating 113 
patients with BAAI, most of those with grade 1 
and 2 injuries were successfully managed non-
operatively with anti-impulse therapy and repeat 
CTA imaging. Most of these injuries did not show 
progression and did not require in-hospital inter-
vention. However, some patients will develop 
angiographic progression of lesions or develop 
symptoms from vessel occlusion, aneurysmal 
degeneration, or pseudoaneurysm formation. Such 
progression should prompt consideration of treat-
ment to prevent further progression to symptom-
atic or life-threatening disease.
2. Patients with grade 4 injuries are more likely to 
present with hypotension and aortic transection 
as well as visceral vessel avulsion. 2-4 In a single-
center experience, all 8 patients with grade 4 
injuries experienced cardiac arrest in the emer-
gency department or operating room. Although all 
8 patients survived to reach the operating room 
and 7 survived the repair, all died within days of 
injury. In multicenter experience, the mortality rate 
Table 33. Descriptions of Blunt Aortic Injury Grades
Injury 
Grade Descriptions
1 Minor intimal tear, intimal defect, or thrombus (/g10010 mm)
2 Large intimal ﬂap, intimal defect, or thrombus (/g11610 mm in 
length or width)
3 Pseudoaneurysm
4 Aortic rupture
In their descriptions of management of BAAIs, Shalhub et al1,2 use an aortic 
injury grading system described by Starnes et al13. Instead of using IMH to 
deﬁne grade 2 injuries, as did Azizzadeh et al,14 Starnes et al13 deﬁne grade 
2 injuries based on a higher degree of intimal injury, defect, thrombus, or all of 
them to match radiographic ﬁndings that they deemed to be less ambiguous.
BAAI indicates blunt traumatic abdominal aortic injury; and IMH, intramural 
hematoma.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e420
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
for grade 4 injuries was 83%. Most deaths from 
BAAI were within the first 24 hours of presenta-
tion and attributable to cardiac arrest from hemor-
rhagic shock.
3. Patients may present with grade 2 injuries without 
evidence of malperfusion and thus be managed 
nonoperatively. However, for patients who pres-
ent with or progress to organ or limb malperfu-
sion, endovascular or open repair may be needed 
to reduce morbidity and mortality rates. In their 
multicenter experience, Shalhub et al 1 found that 
of the 38 patients who present with grade 2 inju-
ries, 45% were initially managed nonoperatively, 
34% were treated with open repair, and 21% were 
treated with endovascular repair. Of those initially 
managed conservatively, 3 eventually progressed 
to having ischemic symptoms warranting consid-
eration of repair, with 1 patient who refused repair 
who died of sepsis from limb ischemia, another who 
died intraoperatively, and a third who successfully 
underwent hybrid endovascular and open repair.
4. Both endovascular and open approaches have 
been described for BAAI, 1-4 and analyses of large 
trauma databases reveal no significant differences 
in mortality rates between the two. Anatomical 
considerations, patient clinical status and comorbid 
injuries, and practitioner experience will influence 
the choice of approach. Shalhub et al 1 found that 
aortic zone 2 and 3 injuries appeared to be more 
amenable to endovascular approaches, while most 
grade 4 injuries were treated with open surgery. 1,2 
Currently, no FDA-approved devices are available 
specifically for treating trauma in the abdominal 
aorta; consequently, clinical judgment and experi-
ence are paramount in choosing an endovascular 
solution.
5. Pseudoaneurysm repair is often performed to pre-
vent progression to uncontrolled aortic rupture, 
although data on characteristics associated with 
progression are scarce. In their multicenter study 
of BAAI, Shalhub et al 1 found that only 30% of 
pseudoaneurysms were managed nonoperatively, 
and failure of nonoperative management occurred 
in 3 of these patients.
6. REBOA has reemerged over the past 10 years 
as a form of rapid hemorrhage control in trauma. 
Many health care centers have shown the feasi-
bility of trauma surgeon or emergency physician 
placement of endovascular balloons for hemor-
rhage control.6,9,10 with a few studies showing sig-
nificant improvement in SBP after placement11 and 
survival benefit compared with those who were not 
treated with REBOA 12 or those treated with open 
methods of hemorrhage control. 8 However, pro-
pensity-matched studies using large trauma data-
bases showed increased mortality rate and risk of 
complications, such as acute kidney injury, amputa-
tion, or both, with use of REBOA.6-8 There are clini-
cal scenarios in which REBOA is contraindicated. 
According to the current US Army Joint Trauma 
Figure 24. Abdominal Aortic Zones of Injury for Surgical Approaches and Abdominal Zones of Injury Based on Trauma 
Classification.
(A) The abdominal aortic zones of injury described by Shalhub et al.1 (B) The abdominal zones of injury traditionally described in trauma. The 
abdominal aortic zones of injury may help in prognostication and deciding whether an endovascular or open repair is feasible. Shalhub et al1 
found that the mortality rate was highest in zone 2 (see panel A) grade 4 aortic injuries (Table 33). Moreover, no zone 2 aortic injuries identified 
in a multicenter experience were managed by endovascular means. Panel A, adapted from Shalhub et al.1 Copyright 2014, with permission from 
Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e421
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
System clinical practice guidelines, REBOA is con-
traindicated in those with pericardial tamponade 
and major thoracic hemorrhage. Relative contrain-
dications to REBOA use include cardiac arrest or 
shock caused by penetrating chest trauma.
7.7.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance 
After Blunt Traumatic Aortic Injury (BTAI)
Recommendations for Long-Term Management and Surveillance After 
BTAI
COR LOE Recommendations
2a C-LD
1. In patients with BTAI who have undergone 
aortic repair, surveillance imaging at intervals 
appropriate for the repair approach and loca-
tion (see Section 7 .8, “Long-Term Manage-
ment and Surveillance Imaging Following 
AAS”) is reasonable.1-4
2b C-LD
2. In patients with BTAI who have not undergone 
repair, surveillance imaging with a CT at 1 
month, 6 months, and 12 months after the 
diagnosis and, if stable, at appropriate inter-
vals thereafter (depending on the type and 
extent of the injury), may be  reasonable.5
Synopsis
In-hospital and midterm outcomes after open and endo-
vascular repair for BTAI are good for patients who sur-
vive to hospital discharge.2-4 However, long-term data are 
limited that report outcomes after open or endovascu-
lar surgical repair for blunt aortic injury. The SVS clini-
cal practice guidelines for traumatic thoracic aortic injury 
suggest that follow-up after TEVAR could be decreased 
to every 2 to 5 years in the absence of abnormalities on 
follow-up imaging (ie, stent graft migration, endoleak) or 
could follow-up standard postoperative imaging surveil-
lance paradigms.6 No published guidelines are available 
for postoperative surveillance after open or endovascular 
abdominal aortic repair for blunt aortic injury.
Long-term data about outcomes of blunt aortic inju-
ries managed nonoperatively are limited. A recent sys-
temic review of nonoperative management of blunt 
thoracic aortic injuries showed low aortic-related event 
rates but injury progression in 7 .6% of patients on sur-
veillance imaging (follow-up, 1 day to 118 months). 5 In 
published series of blunt aortic injury, patients with dis-
ease progression on repeat imaging all undergo repair.4,5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In-hospital data suggest that endograft malposi-
tion (3%) and endoleak (2%) may occur in some 
patients immediately after endovascular repair,1 but 
midterm data after open or endovascular repair of 
BTAIs suggest a low incidence of endoleak, stent 
migration, or reintervention after a mean of 52 to 
60 months. 2-4 Long-term data for outcomes of 
open or endovascular repair of BTAI are lacking.
2. Among patients with blunt traumatic injury who 
are managed nonoperatively, injury progression 
occurred in 7 .6% of patients, and injury healing 
or improvement was observed in 34% of patients 
after a range of 1 day to 118 months of follow-
up.5 Injury progression, intervention, or both occur 
in 0.68% of patients with grade 1 to 2 BTAI.5 Long-
term data for outcomes of blunt aortic injuries 
managed nonoperatively are lacking.
7 .8. Long-Term Management and Surveillance 
Imaging After AAS
7.8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After Aortic 
Dissection and IMH
Recommendations for Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After Aortic 
Dissection and IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients who have had an acute aortic dis-
section and IMH treated with either open or 
endovascular aortic repair and have residual 
aortic disease, surveillance imaging with a 
CT (or MRI) is recommended after 1 month, 
6 months, and 12 months and then, if stable, 
annually thereafter.1-6
1 B-NR
2. In patients who have had an acute aortic dis-
section and IMH that was managed with medi-
cal therapy alone, surveillance imaging with a 
CT (or MRI) is recommended after 1 month, 
6 months, and 12 months and then, if stable, 
annually thereafter.7
Synopsis
Survival after an acute aortic dissection and IMH does 
not guarantee freedom from subsequent aortic events 
because of residual aortic dissection and risk of aneu-
rysm formation. Ten-year survival after repair of acute 
type A aortic dissection is approximately 60% to 65%.1,8 
Risk of reoperation is increased for the aortic valve, the 
aortic root, and the distal aorta, 1,8,9 with an aortic root 
reoperation rate of approximately 15% at 15 years. 9,10 
The growth rate of the distal aorta is ∼1 mm/y, and the 
risk of distal aortic reoperation ranges from 10% to 16% 
at 10 years.1,8,9 Although the use of TEVAR provides pro-
tection from early aortic-related death 11 in acute type B 
aortic dissection, reintervention rates after TEVAR for 
can range from 27% to 39% at midterm follow-up. 11,12 
Surveillance imaging after thoracic aneurysm repair is 
critical to monitor for progression of residual aortic dis-
ease and the potential need for reintervention.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Although patients with uncomplicated type B aor-
tic dissection who are managed medically have a 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e422
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
favorable early prognosis, delayed aortic expansion 
occurs in 20% to 50% of patients over 4 years,7 so 
regular surveillance imaging is essential to detect 
midterm and late aortic growth.7
2. After surgical replacement of the ascending tho-
racic aorta in acute type A aortic dissection, patients 
remain at risk for progressive enlargement of unre-
paired segments of residual dissected aorta, as well 
as potential growth of nondissected native aortic 
segments because of underlying medial degenera-
tion. Consequently, repeat intervention on the aortic 
root, arch, or thoracoabdominal aorta may become 
necessary. For acute type B aortic dissection, 1,2 
TEVAR may leave a patent false lumen, which can 
lead to aneurysm growth, and can be complicated 
by early endoleaks in up to 35% of patients and 
late endoleaks in 13% of patients.5 Careful follow-
up is needed to monitor for progression of disease 
in both dissected and nondissected aorta. In addi-
tion to using cross-sectional imaging for most of 
the aorta, TTE can be helpful in monitoring aortic 
root anatomy and aortic valve function over time.
7.8.2. Long-Term Management After Acute Aortic 
Dissection and IMH
Recommendation for Long-Term Management After Acute Aortic 
Dissection and IMH
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendation
1 B-NR
1. In patients with a previous acute aortic 
dissection and IMH, whether initially 
treated medically or with intervention, 
who have chronic residual TAD and an 
aneurysm with a total aortic diameter of 
≥5.5 cm, elective thoracic aortic repair is 
 recommended. 1-4
Synopsis
Despite the outcomes reported for surgical repair of 
acute aortic dissection and IMH, a risk of ongoing growth 
is possible in the residually dissected as well as nondis-
sected thoracic aortic segments. When surveillance imag-
ing detects progression of residual aortic disease after 
successful treatment of acute aortic dissection and IMH, 
there may be a potential need for aortic reintervention.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Reoperation after acute type A aortic dissection 
repair is associated with low rates of complication. 
The primary indications for reoperation are aneu-
rysms of the thoracic aorta, aortic anastomotic 
pseudoaneurysms, progressive AR, or graft infec-
tion.1 Operative mortality rate of elective repair is 
<10%.1-4 After TEAVR, false-lumen thrombosis can 
occur in 62% of extent 3B dissection and 91% of 
extent 3A dissection cases. Reintervention rates 
after TEVAR range from 15% to 26% at 5 years and 
are dependent on the extent of aortic dissection.4
7.8.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance for 
PAUs
Recommendations for Long-Term Management and Surveillance for 
PAUs
COR LOE Recommendations
2a C-LD
1. In patients with a PAU who have under-
gone aortic repair, surveillance imaging 
at intervals appropriate for the repair 
approach and location (see Section 6.5.6, 
“Surveillance After Aneurysm Repair”) is 
reasonable. 1-3
2a C-LD
2. In patients with a PAU that is being managed 
medically, surveillance imaging with a CT is 
reasonable at 1 month after the diagnosis 
and, if stable, every 6 months for 2 years, 
and then at appropriate intervals thereafter 
(depending on patient age and PAU charac-
teristics).1,4
Synopsis
For patients who undergo repair of a PAU, clinical failure 
(defined as endoleak, disease progression, graft occlu-
sion, repeat aortic intervention, or procedure or aortic-
related death) by 1 year after endovascular and open 
repair occur in 8.6% and 8.7%, respectively. 1 No long-
term data exist for outcomes after repair of PAU, but 
 aortic-related complication rates after intervention are 
likely similar to those for TAA.
For patients with PAUs who are managed nonopera-
tively, the risk of disease progression is significant. 1,5,6 
Disease progression occurs more frequently in patients 
presenting with symptomatic versus asymptomatic 
PAUs7 but is >15% for both. 7, 8 Among patients with a 
PAU who have progression of disease on surveillance 
imaging, 73% will show continued worsening on subse-
quent imaging, and 46% will have progression to frank 
dissection after a mean of 12 months.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. After open or endovascular repair of a PAU, there 
is a 9% risk of clinical failure by 12 months postop-
eratively.1 Freedom from cumulative complications 
and interventions is 86% at 12 months, 79% at 
24 months, and 71% at 36 months postopera-
tively.2 After 18 months of follow-up, new PAUs 
are observed in approximately 5% of patients who 
have undergone repair of a different PAU.3
2. In a series of 109 patients with acute PAUs, 28% 
suffered from an aortic-related adverse event by 
30 days of follow-up. 4 Based on a systematic 
review of 184 patients with either thoracic or aortic 
PAU, 30% had radiographic evidence of disease 
progression on midterm follow-up. 1 For patients 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e423
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
with abdominal PAU, 23% have disease progres-
sion on CTA by 8 months of follow-up, although the 
risk is higher in symptomatic (43%) versus asymp-
tomatic (17%) patients.7
8. PREGNANCY IN PATIENTS WITH 
AORTOPATHY
8.1. Counseling and Management of Aortic 
Disease in Pregnancy and Postpartum
Recommendations for Counseling and Management of Aortic Disease 
in Pregnancy and Postpartum
COR LOE Recommendations
Prepregnancy
1 C-LD
1. In patients with genetic aortopathies attributable 
to syndromic (Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome) 
and nsHTAD and who are contemplating preg-
nancy, genetic counseling before pregnancy to 
discuss the heritable nature of their condition is 
recommended.1-4
1 C-LD
2. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, Turner 
syndrome, BAV with aortic dilation, and other 
aortopathy conditions, aortic imaging (with 
TTE, MRI or CT, or both as appropriate) before 
pregnancy is recommended to determine aortic 
 diameters.1-3,5-13
1 C-LD
3. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, 
Turner syndrome, BAV with aortic dilation, and 
other aortopathy conditions, who are contem-
plating pregnancy, counseling about the risks 
of aortic dissection related to pregnancy is 
recommended.2-5,10,12,14
During Pregnancy
2a C-EO
4. In patients with aortic aneurysms, or at increased 
risk of aortic dissection, or both, it is recom-
mended that pregnancy be managed by a 
multidisciplinary team including a maternal fetal 
medicine specialist and cardiologist, and, if 
logistically feasible, that delivery be planned in 
a hospital where the capability for emergency 
aortic repair is available.
1 C-LD
5. In patients with aortopathies who are preg-
nant, guideline-directed treatment of hyper-
tension is recommended.61517
1 C-EO
6. In patients with syndromic and nsHTAD, 
beta-blocker therapy during pregnancy and 
postpartum is recommended, unless contrain-
dicated.
1 C-LD
7 . In pregnant patients with an aortopathic 
condition or a dilated aortic root or ascend-
ing aorta, surveillance TTE to monitor aortic 
diameters and aortic valve function is recom-
mended each trimester and again several 
weeks postpartum, although imaging may be 
more frequent depending on aortic diameter, 
aortic growth rate, and underlying condi-
tion.7-9,17 ,18
1 C-LD
8. In pregnant patients with aortic disease who 
require surveillance imaging of the aortic arch, 
descending, abdominal aorta, or all 3, MRI with-
out gadolinium is recommended over CT to avoid 
radiation exposure to the fetus.19,20
Synopsis
Pregnancy leads to hemodynamic and hormonal changes 
and is a risk factor for aortic dissection in women with 
aortopathy.21 Aortic dissection may occur throughout 
pregnancy or several weeks postpartum, with most in the 
third trimester or up to 12 weeks’ postpartum. 21 Women 
with aortopathy, including Marfan syndrome, 6,7 ,13,14,18,19,22 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome,2,22,23 vascular Ehlers-Danlos syn-
drome,3,24 nsHTAD, 25,26 Turner syndrome, 12,27 and BAV 
with aneurysm21,28 are at risk of pregnancy-related aortic 
dissection. T ype A aortic dissection in pregnancy associ-
ates with aortic dilation, but type B aortic dissection may 
occur without aortic dilation.6,13,22
Before pregnancy, women with or at risk for aortopa-
thy undergo TTE (and MRI or CT, as appropriate) and 
are counseled about risks of aortic dissection informed 
by specific circumstances. Aortic surveillance imaging 
throughout pregnancy and several weeks postpartum is 
performed to monitor aortic size.9
In women at low risk, vaginal delivery is performed with 
efforts to lessen hemodynamic stress and shorten the 
second stage of labor.9,14 Women at increased risk of aor-
tic complications typically undergo cesarean  delivery.9,14
In women with aortopathy, prepregnancy genetic 
counseling, aortic imaging, discussion about aortic dis-
section risk, and shared decision-making are necessary.9
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. HTAD encompasses conditions in which aortic 
disease has an underlying genetic trigger or famil-
ial occurrence.29,30 Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and 
nsHTAD are autosomal dominant conditions with 
an inheritance risk of 50%. 9,30 BAV may also be 
familial. Prepregnancy counseling by a genetic 
counselor, medical geneticist, or both or aortopathy 
specialist is recommended to discuss the heritabil-
ity of these conditions and to identify at risk rela-
tives and to discuss pregnancy concerns.9,30
2. Women with aortopathic conditions are at risk for 
aortic dilation and aortic dissection related to preg-
nancy.14,22,67 Evaluation of the aortic root, ascending 
aorta, or both by echocardiogram before preg-
nancy in women with aortopathy is important for 
prepregnancy counseling and management during 
pregnancy.1-3,5-7 ,9,11,13 In conditions that associate 
with aortic disease distal to the ascending aorta, 
prepregnancy MRI or CT is performed to evaluate 
for aortic disease.2,5,9,14 
3. The risk of type A aortic dissection in pregnancy 
relates to the aortopathy condition and aortic diam-
eter, but type B aortic dissection may occur with-
out significant aortic dilation. 6,22 Most dissections 
related to pregnancy occur in the third trimester 
and in the first 12 weeks’ postpartum.21 Awareness 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e424
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
of the signs and symptoms of acute aortic dissec-
tion among stakeholders may improve diagnosis 
and outcomes. In Marfan syndrome, type A aortic 
dissection risk is very low when aortic diameters are 
<4.0 cm and are much higher at diameters >4.5 
cm. In series of women with TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 
pathogenic variants, aortic dissection was reported 
in 0% to 19% of pregnancies.21 Rapid aortic growth 
in pregnancy is reported in Loeys-Dietz syndrome.2 
Limited data are available on pregnancy and 
SMAD3, TGFB2, or TGFB3 pathogenic variants.31,32 
Maternal mortality rates in vascular Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome have ranged from 4% to 25%. 3 Among 
283 women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
with 616 delivered pregnancies, 30 women died, 
with a pregnancy-related death rate of 4.9%. 3 
Pregnancy has typically been avoided in women 
with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. 9 The deci-
sion to proceed with pregnancy in vascular Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome is complex and, for some women 
with specific genetic variants, null mutations, and 
normal vascular imaging, the risk may be lower, and 
shared decision-making is required.3 Aortic dissec-
tion at small aortic diameters has been reported in 
some patients with nsHTAD.25,26,33 Aortic dissection 
related to BAV is rare and, when reported, associ-
ates with aneurysmal dilation.14,21,28
4. For women with aortopathic conditions, multidisci-
plinary evaluation before and throughout pregnancy 
can evaluate and manage BP, aortic diameter, and 
monitor pregnancy for complications. Delivery in a 
setting in which cardiothoracic surgery is available 
for urgent management of aortic dissection allows 
rapid treatment for this complication. 25 Educating 
women with aortopathic conditions and their phy-
sicians about the signs and symptoms of acute 
aortic dissection may allow earlier diagnosis and 
improve outcomes.12,21,25
5. Hypertension is a risk factor for aortic dissection in 
pregnancy.6 For appropriate patients with or with-
out hypertension, beta blockers are used through-
out pregnancy and postpartum, recognizing that 
fetal growth may be impaired.13,15 Labetalol is sug-
gested as the beta blocker of choice for use in 
pregnant women with hypertension.35 Other agents 
may be required as suggested by international 
guidelines.16,34 ARBs and ACEIs are contraindi-
cated during pregnancy because of teratogenicity. 
Calcium channel blockers are generally avoided, 
when possible, in Marfan syndrome based on lim-
ited information and concerns raised from mouse 
models.34,35
6. Beta-blocker therapy has been shown to lessen 
aortic growth rates in Marfan syndrome and is rec-
ommended to lessen hemodynamic aortic stress in 
Marfan syndrome and related conditions.4,5,13 In the 
absence of controlled trials, beta blockers are used 
in other aortopathic conditions, and continuation of 
such therapy during pregnancy is recommended 
unless contraindicated.2,5,9 Shard decision-making 
is required, understanding that fetal growth and 
weight may be impaired when beta blockers are 
used in pregnancy.15 However, in ROPAC (Registry 
Of Pregnancy And Cardiac disease), there was 
no significant difference in birth weight in women 
treated with a beta blocker compared with 
untreated women (2960 g [2358–3390 g] versus 
3270 g [2750–3570 g]); P =0.25).14 Because aor-
tic dissection may occur postpartum, beta-blocker 
therapy is continued for at least several weeks 
after delivery and indefinitely for those with indica-
tions for long-term use.
7 . Pregnancy-associated increases in maternal blood 
volume, heart rate, stroke volume and cardiac out-
put, and neurohormonal activation begin in the 
first trimester and peak in the third trimester and 
peripartum period. 9 In women with aortopathic 
conditions, the aorta may dilate during preg-
nancy,7 and significant dilation is a risk factor for 
ROPAC.8,14 Aortic imaging frequency during preg-
nancy is variable and is performed every trimester 
but may be performed more frequently depending 
on individual factors, including the specific aorto-
pathic condition, aortic diameter, and rate of aortic  
growth.3,5,9,10,12-14,25 Evaluation of the aorta several 
weeks postpartum to determine aortic diameter is 
performed to evaluate for aortic dilation.9
8. In patients with aortopathy that involves the aortic 
arch, descending or abdominal aorta or branches, 
or all of them, cross-sectional imaging identifies 
aortic anatomy and diameters. MRI without gado-
linium contrast is low-risk during pregnancy and is 
preferred over CT for elective imaging to avoid the 
risks of ionizing radiation exposure to the devel-
oping fetus.9,19,20 A TEE can be performed during 
pregnancy, if required, to evaluate the descending 
aorta.
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With 
Aortopathy
Recommendations for Delivery in Pregnant Patients With Aortopathy
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. In pregnant patients with a history of chronic 
aortic dissection, cesarean delivery is recom-
mended.
1 C-EO
2. In pregnant patients with an aortopathy and 
an aortic diameter of <4.0 cm, vaginal delivery 
(when otherwise appropriate) is recom-
mended.
2a C-EO
3. In pregnant patients with a diameter of the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, of ≥4.5 
cm, cesarean delivery is reasonable.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e425
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
2b C-EO
4. In pregnant patients with a diameter of the 
aortic root, ascending aorta, or both, of 4.0 cm 
to 4.5 cm, vaginal delivery with regional anes-
thesia, expedited second stage, and assisted 
delivery may be reasonable.
2b C-EO
5. In pregnant patients with syndromic and 
nsHTAD, and a diameter of the aortic root, 
ascending aorta, or both, of 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm, 
cesarean delivery may be considered.
Synopsis
The risk of type A aortic dissection related to pregnancy 
in Marfan syndrome is related to aortic root diameter, 
with a low risk (∼1%) of aortic dissection at an aortic 
diameter <4.0 cm and much greater risk at aortic diam-
eters >4.5 cm. 1-3 Progressive aortic dilation and hyper-
tension also determine dissection risk. 4-6 Complex and 
shared decision-making is required when the aorta is 
between 4.0 cm and 4.5 cm in diameter, recognizing that 
although some series report low risk,2,7 ,8 aortic dissection 
related to pregnancy at this diameter may occur. 1 Modi-
fied World Health Organization classification on cardio-
vascular risk places women with Marfan syndrome and 
moderate aortic dilation of 4.0 cm to 4.5 cm in modified 
World Health Organization class III and those with aor-
tic diameter >4.5 cm in class IV. 9 Because of increased 
risk of aortic dissection, pregnancy is avoided when the 
aortic root diameter is >4.5 cm.1-3,9 T ype B aortic dissec-
tion is responsible for 20% to 40% of pregnancy-related 
dissections in Marfan syndrome, often occurring without 
aortic dilation1,6,8,10 and may occur after previous aortic 
root replacement in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz 
syndrome.11,12 Aortic dissection frequently occurs post-
partum, with heightened risk up to 12 weeks after deliv-
ery.1 Patients at risk and their care teams should remain 
alert to signs and symptoms suggesting acute dissection.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Very limited information exists about pregnancy-
related aortic risks in patients with chronic aortic 
dissection. Because of concerns for aneurysmal 
enlargement, recurrent dissection and aortic rup-
ture, pregnancy is considered to be high risk in 
women with chronic aortic dissection. To allow opti-
mal timing of delivery, elective cesarean delivery is 
usually performed in women with chronic aortic 
dissection.
2. T ype A and type B aortic dissection related to preg-
nancy may occur in Marfan syndrome. 1,2,6 Women 
with aortic root dilation >4.0 cm and, especially 
>4.5 cm, are at increased risk of type A aortic dis-
section during pregnancy and postpartum.1,3 Aortic 
dissection has been reported to be low risk in small 
series of women with aortic diameters between 
4.0 cm and 4.5 cm,2,7 ,8 but aortic dissection related 
to pregnancy at this diameter may occur. 1 T ype B 
aortic dissection related to pregnancy may occur 
without significant aortic dilation and after previous 
aortic root replacement.1,11
3. In the absence of controlled trials, cesarean deliv-
ery is often performed in women with Marfan syn-
drome and a significantly dilated aorta to allow for 
a planned delivery.2,9
4. There are no randomized trials of delivery methods 
in women with aortopathy. When the aorta is not 
significantly dilated, vaginal delivery using methods 
to lessen hemodynamic stress, including regional 
anesthesia and an expedited second stage and 
assisted delivery, is often performed.2,8,9 Coexistent 
lumbosacral dural ectasia, spine disease, or both in 
women with aortopathic conditions may complicate 
epidural anesthesia.13,14
5. Cesarean delivery is often performed in women 
with Marfan syndrome and aortic dilation of >4.0 
cm.2,8 Among 27 women with Marfan syndrome 
and aortic dilation, 21 of 27 women had a vaginal 
delivery. The cesarean delivery rate was 23.8% and 
16.7% in women with diameter <4.0 cm and 4.0 
cm to 4.5 cm, respectively.8
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With 
Aortic Disease
Recommendations for Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With Aortic 
Disease
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with Marfan syndrome and an 
aortic root diameter of >4.5 cm, aortic surgery 
before pregnancy is recommended.1-4
2b C-LD
If the aortic root diameter is 4.0 cm to 4.5 
cm, aortic surgery before pregnancy may be 
considered, especially if there are risk factors 
for aortic dissection (ie, rapid aortic growth of 
≥0.3 cm/y or a family history of aortic dissec-
tion).1,2,5-8
2a C-EO
2. In patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome 
attributable to pathogenic variants in 
TGFB2 or TGFB3 and an aortic diameter of 
≥4.5 cm, surgery before pregnancy is rea-
sonable.
2b C-EO
If the Loeys-Dietz syndrome is attributable 
to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, 
or SMAD3, and the aortic diameter is ≥ 4.0 
cm, surgery before pregnancy may be con-
sidered.
1 C-EO
3. In patients with nsHTAD and an aortic diam-
eter of ≥4.5 cm, surgery before pregnancy is 
recommended.
2b C-EO
If the aortic diameter is 4.0 cm to 4.4 cm, 
surgery before pregnancy may be considered, 
depending on the molecular diagnosis, family 
history, and aortic growth rate.
Recommendations for Delivery in Pregnant Patients With Aortopathy 
(Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e426
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
1 C-LD
4. In patients with Turner syndrome and ASI of 
≥2.5 cm/m2, surgery before pregnancy is rec-
ommended.9-11
1 C-EO
5. In patients with a BAV (in the absence of 
Turner syndrome or an HTAD) and an aortic 
diameter of ≥5.0 cm, surgery before preg-
nancy is recommended.
1 C-EO
6. In patients with sporadic aortic root aneu-
rysms, ascending aortic aneurysms, or both 
and a diameter of ≥5.0 cm, surgery before 
pregnancy is recommended.
Synopsis
The decision to proceed with operative intervention for 
an aortic root, ascending aortic aneurysm, or both in a 
woman contemplating pregnancy is complex and depends 
on many factors. Considerations that inform this decision 
include the specific disorder, genetic variant, rate of aortic 
growth, family history, and phenotype and include shared 
decision-making (Table 34). Specialists involved in this 
decision may include aortopathic specialists, cardiologists, 
medical geneticists, maternal fetal medicine specialists, 
and aortic surgeons at experienced centers. The risks of 
aortic surgery should be considered and although prophy-
lactic aneurysm surgery will prevent proximal aortic dis-
section, a risk remains of pregnancy-related dissection 
distal to the aortic graft in HTAD, and this risk may be 
higher in women with Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable 
to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2.12,13
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Women with Marfan syndrome and aortic root 
dilation >40 mm and especially >4.5 cm are at 
increased risk of type A aortic dissection during 
pregnancy and postpartum. 1,2,6,7 ,12 Pregnancy in 
small series of women with Marfan syndrome and 
aortic diameters between 4.0 cm and 4.5 cm was 
reported to be relatively safe in carefully monitored 
women,1-4 although acute type A aortic dissection 
may occur.5 The presence of additional risk factors 
for aortic dissection, including family history of aor-
tic dissection and rapid aortic growth (≥0.3 cm/y), 
and patient preference may inform the shared 
decision for aortic surgery before pregnancy when 
the aortic diameter is <4.5 cm.8,14,15
2. Information is lacking about aortic diameters 
and aortic dissection risk related to pregnancy in 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome, because most women who 
were pregnant were unaware of their diagnosis 
before pregnancy. The size threshold for elec-
tive surgery to replace the dilated aortic root and 
ascending aorta in Loeys-Dietz syndrome depends 
on multiple factors and is informed by the specific 
pathogenic variant and the family history, rate of 
aortic growth, extra-aortic phenotypic features, 
and involves shared decision-making. Patients with 
TGFB2- and TGFB3-related Loeys-Dietz syndrome 
may have a lower aortic dissection risk than those 
with variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, or SMAD3.16,17 
Women with aortic root diameters of >4.0 cm 
are likely at increased risk for pregnancy-related 
aortic dissection based on data from women with 
Marfan syndrome and the more severe aortopathy 
in Loeys-Dietz syndrome attributable to TGFBR1, 
TGFBR2, and SMAD3 variants.5,18-20 There were no 
pregnancy-related aortic dissection reported in a 
series of women with SMAD3 variants, but only 2 
women had aortic diameters known before preg-
nancy (and both were normal).20
3. Because phenotypic features are absent in 
patients with nsHTAD because of pathogenic vari-
ants in multiple genes (eg, ACTA2, MYH11, MYLK, 
PRKG1, and others), the first manifestation of dis-
ease may be acute aortic dissection, including that 
related to pregnancy.21 In a series of patients with 
ACTA2 pathogenic variants, 20% of aortic dissec-
tion were related to pregnancy.21 Aortic dissection 
at small aortic diameters has been reported related 
Recommendations for Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With Aortic 
Disease (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Table 34. Prophylactic Aortic Surgery Before Pregnancy in 
Women With Aortopathic Conditions
Condition
Surgical Threshold Before 
Pregnancy* by Aortic 
Diameter (cm) or Aortic Size 
Index (cm/m2)
Marfan syndrome >4.5 cm
Marfan syndrome with risk factors 
(rapid aortic growth of /g1160.3 cm/y; 
family history of aortic dissection)
4.0–4.5 cm
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attributable 
to pathogenic variants in TGFBR1, 
TGFBR2, or SMAD3)
/g1164.0 cm
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (attributable 
to pathogenic variants in TGFB2 or 
TGFB3)
/g1164.5 cm
Nonsyndromic heritable thoracic 
aortic disease
/g1164.5 cm†
Turner syndrome /g1162.5 cm/m2
Bicuspid aortic valve /g1165.0 cm‡
*Shared decision-making is required to determine the surgical threshold be-
fore elective aortic root, ascending aortic surgery, or both and is informed by 
the condition, speciﬁc pathogenic variant, age, body size, aortic growth rate, 
phenotype, and family history of aortic dissection, and surgery at smaller aortic 
diameters may be considered depending on individual circumstances.
†Aortic dissection related to pregnancy has occurred at small aortic diameters 
in women with ACTA2 and MYLK pathogenic variants. Prophylactic aortic sur-
gery before pregnancy at smaller aortic diameters may be reasonable in these 
conditions and other nonsyndromic heritable thoracic aortic disease and may be 
informed by the molecular diagnosis, family history, and aortic growth rate.
‡Prophylactic aortic surgery may be considered at smaller aortic diameters 
depending on body size, aortic growth rate, and family history.
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendations in Table 2.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e427
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
to pregnancy in patients with ACTA2- and MYLK-
related HTAD.21,22 Ruptured type B dissection has 
been reported.23 Individualized assessment of preg-
nancy risks based on the specific genetic condition 
and other individual factors may inform pregnancy 
management, recognizing that limited information 
is available to guide decision-making.21,22,24
4. Among those with Turner syndrome, an ASI 
>2.0 cm/m 2 is considered dilated, and the risk 
of aortic dissection in Turner syndrome is great-
est when the ASI is ≥2.5 cm/m 2.9,10 When aortic 
dissection occurs in Turner syndrome, almost 90% 
of cases have an identifiable risk factor, such as 
underlying aortic dilation, aortic coarctation, BAV, 
or hypertension.11
5. Despite the relative frequency of BAV in the popu-
lation, aortic dissection related to pregnancy in 
patients with a BAV (and without Turner syndrome 
or HTAD) is rarely reported. 5,25 In 88 women with 
BAV and without aortic dilation, there were no 
cases of aortic dissection in 186 deliveries. 26 In a 
series of 49 patients with BAV with moderate aortic 
dilation (median aortic diameter 42 mm) reporting 
pregnancy outcomes, there were no cases of aor-
tic dissection.3 When type A aortic dissection did 
complicate pregnancy in isolated BAV, significant 
aortic dilation was noted.5,25 There is no evidence-
based information regarding pregnancy outcomes 
in women with BAV and aortic diameters >4.5 cm 
to inform aortic risk. In these cases, pregnancy 
management and shared decisions about aortic 
surgery may be informed by other risk factors for 
dissection, including rapid aortic growth, body size, 
and family history. Aortic dissection risk increases 
in patients with BAV when the aortic diameter 
exceeds 5 cm.27 Because of risk of aortic dissec-
tion, pregnancy in patients with a BAV and an aor-
tic diameter of >5.0 cm is classified to be modified 
World Health Organization class IV, carrying high 
risk of maternal morbidity and mortality.28
6. Aortic root and or ascending aortic dilation >4.0 cm 
in a woman of child-bearing age is uncommon, and 
its presence should trigger an evaluation for under-
lying genetic aortopathy.29 Even when there is clear 
evidence of an autosomal dominant transmission 
of TAA in a family, currently available molecular 
genetic technology only identifies a pathogenic 
variant in a known gene leading to TAA in about 
20% to 25% of families.29 In sporadic TAA disease, 
genetic variants are found in even fewer cases. In 
young patients at low surgical risk with aortic root 
or ascending aortic aneurysms of 5.0 cm, surgical 
intervention is performed. Surgery before preg-
nancy at smaller aortic diameters is sometimes 
performed and is informed by aortic growth rate, 
hypertension, surgical expertise, patient wishes, 
and other factors involving a shared decision 
depending on individual circumstances.
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: 
Aortic Dissection and Aortic Surgery in 
Pregnancy
Recommendations for Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: Aortic 
Dissection and Aortic Surgery in Pregnancy
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients experiencing an acute type A aortic 
dissection during the first or second trimester 
of pregnancy, urgent aortic surgery with fetal 
monitoring is  recommended.1-3
1 C-LD
2. In patients experiencing an acute type A 
aortic dissection during the third trimester of 
pregnancy, urgent cesarean delivery imme-
diately followed by aortic surgery is recom-
mended.1-4
1 C-EO
3. In patients experiencing an acute type B 
aortic dissection during pregnancy, medical 
therapy is recommended, unless endovascular 
or surgical therapy is required to manage 
acute complications.5
2b C-EO
4. In patients with progressive aortic dilation 
during pregnancy, prophylactic aortic surgery 
may be considered, depending on individual 
circumstances.1,2,4
Synopsis
During pregnancy, if marked aortic dilation is present 
or rapid aortic expansion occurs, risks of maternal aor-
tic dissection or rupture must be considered. If early in 
pregnancy, high maternal risk of morbidity or death may 
warrant pregnancy termination.1,4 Prophylactic aortic sur-
gery during pregnancy requires complex decision-making 
and should be individualized based on maternal and fetal 
risks.1,2,4 Cardiac surgery in the first trimester has risks of 
fetal developmental defects, while surgery in the third tri-
mester carries risks to fetal circulation and maternal hemo-
dynamics.1 Semi-elective surgery during pregnancy may 
have its lowest collective risk to fetal organogenesis and 
maternal hemodynamics during the second trimester.1,3,4 If 
type A aortic dissection occurs during pregnancy, urgent 
obstetric and cardiac surgical consultation is necessary, 
because management strategies depend on the viability 
of the fetus and condition of the mother. If type A aortic 
dissection occurs in the first 26 weeks, emergency car-
diac surgery is performed, recognizing risk of fetal loss.1,2,4 
When duration of pregnancy associates with higher like-
lihood of independent fetal survival (especially after 28 
weeks), cesarean delivery followed by aortic repair pro-
vides the best chances for fetal and maternal survival.1,2,4
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. If type A aortic dissection occurs during the first 2 
trimesters, emergency aortic surgery is performed 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e428
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
first with fetal monitoring and modifications to 
anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass, recogniz-
ing the high risk of fetal loss.1-4 If acute type A aor-
tic dissection occurs between 24 and 28 weeks, 
the care team must balance maternal and fetal 
risks when deciding between cesarean delivery fol-
lowed by aortic surgery or aortic surgery with fetal 
surveillance.1,4
2. If type A aortic dissection occurs in the third tri-
mester, given the increased likelihood of inde-
pendent fetal survival, emergency cesarean 
delivery followed by maternal aortic surgery is rec-
ommended.1,2,4 In a series of 20 patients with type 
A aortic dissection during pregnancy, 19 under-
went surgical repair and, of those at >28 weeks 
gestation, delivery first followed by aortic surgery 
achieved good fetal outcomes.2
3. Although uncomplicated type B aortic dissection in 
pregnancy is treated medically, 20% will go on to 
develop complications that require intervention5; in 
such cases, endovascular repair is preferred over 
open surgery, whenever feasible.5
4. Prophylactic aortic surgery during pregnancy 
requires complex decision-making, and manage-
ment is individualized based on maternal and fetal 
risks and benefits.1,2,4
9. OTHER AORTIC CONDITIONS
9.1. Inflammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis and Giant Cell 
Arteritis (GCA)
Recommendations for Inflammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and Treatment 
of Takayasu Arteritis and GCA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
Diagnosis
1 C-LD
1. In patients with large vessel vasculitis 
(L VV), prompt evaluation of the entire 
aorta and branch vessels with MRI or 
CT, with or without 18F-FDG positron 
emission tomography (FDG-PET), is 
 recommended.1-6
Treatment
1 B-NR
2. In patients with active GCA or Takayasu arteri-
tis, initial medical therapy should include high-
dose glucocorticoids.7-12
1 B-R
3. In patients with GCA who have evidence of 
active aortitis, tocilizumab is recommended 
as adjunctive therapy to glucocorticoids, with 
methotrexate as an alternative.7 ,13,14
1 C-LD
4. In all patients with Takayasu arteritis, non-
biological disease-modifying anti-rheumatic 
drugs (DMARD) should be given in combina-
tion with glucocorticoids.7 ,15,16
1 C-LD
5. In patients with active GCA or Takayasu 
arteritis, treatment efficacy should be 
periodically assessed by monitoring inflam-
matory serum markers (C-reactive protein 
and erythrocyte sedimentation rate), imag-
ing with CT, MRI, or FDG-PET, and clinical 
symptoms. 1,7 ,15,17-20
2a C-LD
6. In patients with GCA or Takayasu arteritis 
who are in remission, elective endovascular 
or open surgical intervention is reasonable 
to treat aortic and branch vessel complica-
tions.7 ,21
2a C-EO
7 . In patients with GCA or Takayasu arteritis 
and aortic involvement who are in remission, 
annual surveillance imaging with CT, MRI, or 
FDG-PET is reasonable.1,7 ,17-19
Synopsis
L VV comprises Takayasu arteritis and GCA, which are the 
most common causes of aortitis.22,23 Other known causes 
of aortitis include immunoglobulin G4–related disease, 
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-related vasculitis, 
sarcoidosis, Behçet’s disease, relapsing polychondritis, 
and granulomatosis with polyangiitis; many cases of aor-
titis remain idiopathic. Whereas Takayasu arteritis and 
GCA tend to affect the thoracic aorta, immunoglobulin 
G4–related disease most commonly affects the abdomi-
nal aorta. Diagnostic criteria are summarized in Table 35. 
Prompt diagnosis and initiation of treatment is of utmost 
importance, because potential complications include 
aortic aneurysms, aortic dissection, IMH, PAU, and rup-
ture, as well as progressive atherosclerosis and throm-
botic complications. 24 18F-FDG-PET with CT is useful 
for both the diagnosis of suspected L VV and to evaluate 
anti-inflammatory treatment response, especially before 
planned revascularization.4,5 Initial treatment options for 
Takayasu arteritis and GCA include high-dose glucocor-
ticoid therapy (prednisone at 40–60 mg/d, or equivalent) 
or, for select cases, intravenous pulse steroids along with 
adjunctive therapy, including (but not limited to) tocili-
zumab and methotrexate (Figures 25 and 26). Revas-
cularization may be warranted in select cases of stable 
disease, as well as in AAS.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In suspected GCA or Takayasu arteritis, early imag-
ing can confirm the diagnosis when the results com-
plement clinical findings.1 Imaging the aorta should 
be performed as soon as possible so that initiation 
of treatment is not delayed, given the risk of compli-
cations from untreated L VV. Sensitivity of diagnostic 
imaging in the initial diagnosis of L VV decreases 
Recommendations for Inflammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and Treatment 
of Takayasu Arteritis and GCA (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e429
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
with duration of glucocorticoid treatment. 2 FDG-
PET has a reported specificity for GCA-related aor-
titis as high as 100% and CTA about 85%.5 In CT, 
wall thickening from inflammation may be mistaken 
for atherosclerosis; however, given CT’s usefulness 
in assessing occlusive lesions, intimal injury, ulcer-
ative plaques, and aneurysmal disease, it is often 
combined with FDG-PET in L VV.1 Evidence is limited 
for the role of MRI in GCA, but MRI is widely used 
in Takayasu arteritis given the patients’ younger age 
at diagnosis and need for lifelong surveillance imag-
ing.6 If proximal aortic involvement is confirmed by 
CT or MRI, then echocardiography may be helpful to 
assess aortic valve function.
2. Active vasculitis is diagnosed by clinical symp-
toms of GCA or Takayasu arteritis with evidence 
of inflammation by serum biomarkers, imaging, or 
both. High-dose glucocorticoid therapy (prednisone 
at 40–60 mg/d or equivalent) is standard induction 
therapy for GCA and Takayasu arteritis and leads 
to remission and control of active disease in most 
patients7-12 (Figures 25 and 26). Evidence support-
ing the efficacy of induction therapy with high-dose 
intravenous methylprednisolone in GCA comes 
only from small clinical trials, and thus the 2018 
recommendations from the European Alliance of 
Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR; formerly 
the European League Against Rheumatism) limits 
its use to patients with severe GCA at risk for blind-
ness in the acute setting, and administration should 
not delay oral glucocorticoid treatment. 7-9 Once 
the acute phase is controlled, glucocorticoid taper 
should be initiated to reach a target prednisone 
dose of 15 to 20 mg/d within 2 to 3 months, and 
≤5 mg/d for GCA and ≤10 mg/d for Takayasu arte-
ritis after 1 year.7 Older guidelines have supported 
the use of antiplatelet or anticoagulants in L VV. 
Evidence from a meta-analysis does not support use 
of prophylactic antithrombotic therapy in all patients 
with GCA 25; instead, an individualized approach 
to antithrombotic therapy is recommended in the 
acute and chronic phases of GCA and Takayasu 
arteritis, based on imaging and clinical findings of 
aortic and branch vessel complications.26
3. In an RCT of 251 patients with GCA, a 26-week 
prednisone taper combined with tocilizumab, an 
interleukin-6 receptor inhibitor, was superior to 
either a 26-week or 52-week prednisone taper 
plus placebo in reducing the primary outcome of 
glucocorticoid-free disease remission at 1 year. 10 
Tocilizumab gained approval for use in 2017 
as adjunctive therapy for select patients with 
GCA, with methotrexate remaining an alternative 
option.7 ,13,14 The EULAR 2018 updated guidelines 
recommended limiting the use of adjunctive ther-
apy to those with refractory or relapsing disease, 
those at risk of adverse effects of glucocorticoid 
treatment, or those at risk of cardiovascular com-
plications (aortitis and major branch vessel involve-
ment) from GCA7 (Figure 25).
4. High-quality randomized clinical trial evidence sup-
porting the use of adjunctive therapy in Takayasu 
arteritis is limited. However, consensus expert 
opinion is to initiate DMARDs in combination 
with glucocorticoids in all patients with Takayasu 
arteritis, given high relapse rates of up to 70%. 7 
Nonbiological DMARDs (eg, methotrexate, 
hydroxychloroquine, azathioprine, sulfamethoxa-
zole, and leflunomide) are considered first line 
according to the EULAR 2018 updated guide-
lines on Takayasu arteritis treatment, with biologi-
cal DMARDs (eg, tocilizumab or tumor necrosis 
factor-inhibitors) as second-line agents in select 
patients who relapse on initial combination ther-
apy7 ,15,16 (Figure 26). Optimal treatment duration in 
Takayasu arteritis is less well understood, because 
Table 35. Diagnostic Criteria for Inﬂammatory Aortitis
Names Criteria Used in Diagnosis When Is Diagnosis Established?
Takayasu arteritis Age of onset <40 y
Intermittent claudication
/g1163 criteria are present (sensitivity 90.5%; speciﬁcity 97.8%)
Diminished brachial artery pulse
Subclavian artery or aortic bruit
Systolic BP variation of >10 mm Hg between arms
Aortographic evidence of aorta or aortic branch stenosis
Giant cell arteritis Age >50 y
Recent-onset localized headache
/g1163 criteria are present (sensitivity >90%; speciﬁcity >90%)
Temporal artery tenderness or pulse attenuation
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate >50 mm/h
Arterial biopsy shows necrotizing vasculitis
Reprinted from Hiratzka et al. 2019.27
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e430
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
defining remission in Takayasu arteritis is challeng-
ing. Outcomes measures may include any of these: 
remission based on clinical criteria, normalization of 
inflammatory biomarkers, stabilization on serial CT 
or MRI, improvement on PET-CT imaging, quality 
of life, and presence of clinical disease relapse. 15 
A clear need remains for both adequately pow-
ered randomized clinical trials of Takayasu arteritis 
therapies and a consensus definition of treatment 
success.
5. The EULAR 2018 updated guidelines placed the 
greatest emphasis on both the improvement of 
clinical symptoms and the stability of inflammatory 
biomarkers in defining the remission phase of L VV. 
Consequently, data are limited regarding the role 
of surveillance imaging in those with no signs or 
Figure 25. The 2018 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR; formerly European League Against 
Rheumatism) Recommended Algorithms for the Pharmacological Treatment of Giant Cell Arteritis.
GC indicates glucocorticoids; GCA, giant cell arteritis; and TNF, tumor necrosis factor. Modified from Hellmich et al.7 Copyright 2020, with 
permission from BMJ Publishing Group Limited.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e431
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
symptoms of active disease. Currently, tomographic 
imaging is complementary to clinical symptoms and 
laboratory surveillance, and its use should be indi-
vidualized, focused mostly on the evaluation of new 
symptoms or signs of aortic, major branch artery 
stenoses or aneurysms, or both. 1,7 ,15,17-19 One pro-
spective cohort study using FDG-PET in disease 
surveillance of GCA showed reduced inflammatory 
activity at 3 months after treatment initiation but no 
further change at 6 months, with most patients in 
clinical remission still showing positive PET find-
ings.20 What remains unknown are the potential 
anatomic consequences of having a positive FDG-
PET scan despite clinical remission.
6. In patients with L VV who are in remission and have 
aortic or branch artery complications that do not 
Figure 26. The 2018 European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (EULAR; formerly European League Against 
Rheumatism) Recommended Algorithms for the Pharmacological Treatment of Takayasu Arteritis.
csDMARD indicates conventional synthetic disease modifying antirheumatic drug; GC, glucocorticoids; and TNF, tumor necrosis factor. Modified 
from Hellmich et al.7 Copyright 2020, with permission from BMJ Publishing Group Limited.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e432
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
warrant urgent intervention, the role of elective endo-
vascular or open surgical repair approach should be 
determined by a multidisciplinary team including, but 
not limited to, vascular surgery, vascular medicine, 
cardiology, and radiology specialists. The risk of such 
elective intervention is lowest when patients are in 
the remission phase of the L VV7; therefore, before 
intervention, imaging with 18F-FDG-PET CT is often 
helpful to assess treatment response and quantify 
the degree of ongoing active inflammation.1,4,5,18
7 . The EULAR consensus definitions for relapse and 
remission have been incorporated into the 2018 
updated recommendations for management of 
LV V.7 A major relapse of GCA and Takayasu arteritis 
includes recurrence of clinical features of ischemia 
(ie, visual loss, jaw claudication, limb claudication, 
stroke) or evidence of active aortic inflammation 
resulting in branch vessel stenosis, aortic aneurysm, 
or dissection. Remission of L VV is characterized by 
lack of new clinical symptoms, a normalization of 
inflammatory biomarkers, and no evidence of pro-
gressive aortic and branch artery dilation or nar-
rowing by surveillance imaging. However, signals 
of vessel inflammation may persist even in the 
absence of clinical disease.1,6,19 For those in remis-
sion, annual surveillance imaging with CT or MRI is 
useful to detect disease progression in the aortic 
and branch arteries, even in the absence of inflam-
mation. More frequent surveillance imaging may be 
necessary when evidence of active disease pro-
gression is apparent on annual imaging or if new 
symptoms suggestive of arterial stenosis arise.
9.2. Infectious Aortitis
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management of Infection of 
the Native Aorta
Recommendations for Diagnosis and Management of Infection of the 
Native Aorta
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. In patients with infectious aortitis and associ-
ated aneurysms or dissection of the thoracic 
or abdominal aorta, open surgical repair is 
recommended.
2b C-LD In select patients, treatment with endovascular 
repair may be considered.1-3
2a C-EO
2. In patients with infectious aortitis compli-
cated by rupture, either open or endovas-
cular repair is reasonable, based on the 
patient’s status at presentation and institu-
tional expertise.
2b C-EO
3. In patients with infectious aortitis, intravenous 
antimicrobial therapy of at least 6 weeks’ 
duration may be considered, with lifelong sup-
pressive therapy in select cases not amenable 
to interventional repair or who have recurrent 
infection.
Synopsis
The term “infectious aortitis” describes an infection of 
the aorta and has supplanted the older term “mycotic 
aneurysm,” which was used broadly but actually implies a 
fungal cause. Aortic infections arise from either contigu-
ous spread from adjacent structures or septic emboli and 
hematogenous spread of microorganisms to the aortic 
wall via a vulnerable plaque or preexisting aneurysm. 4 
Staphylococcus aureus, Pneumococcus, Escherichia coli, 
and Salmonella are the pathogens identified in most 
reports.1-6 Syphilitic aortitis, which typically appears 10 
to 25 years after systemic Treponema pallidum infection, 
is now rare. Fungal aortitis (from Candida or Aspergil-
lus) and tuberculous aortitis are uncommon and typically 
arise in immunocompromised hosts.
Medical therapy is challenging because the caus-
ative organism is not always identified, but a prolonged 
course of antibiotics is often warranted. 4 The mortal-
ity rate of infectious aortitis is high, because complica-
tions include sepsis, aneurysm formation (saccular or 
pseudoaneurysm), erosion and subsequent fistula, dis-
section, or rupture. CT and MRI can size the aneurysm, 
detect complications, and aid in interventional plan-
ning. TEE is especially useful for imaging involvement 
of the aortic root and associated complications. 5 Open 
surgical repair is the standard treatment for infectious 
aortitis; however, in select patients with rupture, fistula, 
hemodynamic instability, or both, a hybrid or bridging 
approach with endovascular therapy (Table 36) may be 
used.2-8
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. A diagnosis of infectious aortitis or mycotic aneu-
rysm and its complications warrants prolonged 
antimicrobial therapy regardless of intervention, 
with 2016 scientific statement from the AHA 
suggesting a duration of 6 weeks to 6 months, 
with consideration of lifelong suppressive therapy 
in some cases. 5 Given the high risk of rupture or 
contained rupture in infectious aortitis, open sur-
gical repair is often warranted, although the data 
supporting open surgical repair are limited, with 
most evidence derived from single-institution 
case series and small cohort studies. 6-8 Open 
surgical repair includes in situ reconstruction or 
aortic resection with extra-anatomic bypass (ie, 
axillobifemoral bypass or femorofemoral cross-
over bypass graft placement) 3; surgical debride-
ment of all infected tissue is essential to minimize 
the risk of persistent infection. The use of endo-
vascular repair has been increasing in select 
patients with infectious aortitis. 6-8 Limited data are 
available for comparison of open surgical versus 
endovascular repair; some small studies showed 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e433
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
similar long-term survival between the 2 methods 
in treatment of infectious abdominal aortitis, 1-4 
although the evidence may have selection bias. 
In a nationwide Swedish retrospective population-
based cohort study of 132 patients, of whom 50 
(38%) presented with rupture, using propen-
sity score analyses, 5-year survival was similar 
with open repair versus EVAR, at 60% versus 
58%, respectively. 3 Moreover, the use of EVAR 
was associated with improved short-term sur-
vival and was not associated with an increase in 
infection-related complications or a need for late 
reoperation.3 Use of endovascular repair in the 
management of infectious thoracic aneurysms, 
abdominal aneurysms, or both warrants ongoing 
study, and at present may be most appropriate 
as a bridge procedure in cases of instability or 
impending rupture, or in patients who may not be 
fit for open surgical intervention 5 (Table 36).
2. The prognosis is often poor for infectious aor-
titis, especially if rupture has occurred. 6 From 
a large single-institution study over 18 years 
of 2520 patients who underwent surgery for 
infectious aortic aneurysms, 24% of aneurysms 
had already ruptured at presentation, and 61% 
had penetrated into periaortic tissues. 6 Open 
surgical treatment options include resection 
of infected aorta with extra-anatomic recon-
struction (for abdominal aneurysm), or in situ 
reconstruction (for thoracic aneurysms and 
some aortoenteric fistulae). 2-5,7 ,8 The choice of 
intervention is based on multiple factors (Table 
36), including the location and extension of the 
aneurysm(s), the presence of fistulae, and the 
patient’s clinical status. In select patients with 
aneurysm rupture and hemodynamic instabil-
ity and/or uncontrolled bleeding, endovascular 
repair may be used. 6
3. Because peripheral blood cultures and surgical 
specimen cultures may be negative in a large 
proportion of patients with infectious aortitis, 5 the 
choice of antimicrobial agents may be empiric, 
and infectious disease experts are usually 
involved in directing therapy. Treatment with anti-
microbial therapy alone (ie, without intervention) 
is associated with high mortality rate and may not 
prevent aneurysm expansion or rupture 6,9,10 and 
is thus reserved for patients who are not can-
didates for open or endovascular repair or for 
those in whom a palliative approach is appropri-
ate. No clinical trial data are available to define 
the optimal duration of antimicrobial therapy, 
whether as solo therapy or as adjunctive therapy 
to aortic intervention, but expert opinion suggests 
a duration of at least 6 weeks, and possibly lon-
ger.5,11 Because the response of uncomplicated 
(without rupture or fistulae) infectious aortitis to 
antimicrobial therapy may influence the choice 
of interventional approach, it is also reasonable 
to have patients undergo surveillance imaging 
at intervals deemed appropriate by a multidisci-
plinary care team.
Table 36. Management of Aortic Mycotic Aneurysm: Comparison of Resection and Extra-Anatomic Reconstruction, In Situ 
 Reconstruction, or Endovascular Device Repair
ProcedureP otential Indications* Advantages Disadvantages
Extra-anatomic 
 reconstruction
Infrarenal location with gross puru-
lence, psoas or retroperitoneal ab-
scess, vertebral osteomyelitis, inade-
quate response to antibiotic therapy, 
selected aortoenteric ﬁstulae
Avoids placement of foreign body in 
infected area
Not technically feasible for thoracic, suprarenal, 
or visceral location or for emergency use
Long operating time
Long-term patency rates low Stump blowout
Limb ischemia, amputation
Reinfection rate higher than for in situ recon-
struction
Ischemic colitis
In situ reconstruction Thoracic, suprarenal, infrarenal, or 
visceral location
Selected aortoenteric ﬁstulae
More versatile than extra-anatomic: 
fewer long-term complications, higher 
patency rates, lower recurrent infection 
rate, shorter operating time
Polyester grafts† available for emer-
gency surgery
Theoretical risk of infection because of interposi-
tion of foreign material in infected site
Endovascular device 
repair
Bridge procedure‡: hemodynamic 
instability, uncontrolled bleeding, 
rupture or impending rupture, se-
lected patients with aortocentric 
ﬁstulae, patients who are not ﬁt for 
open surgery
Emergency stabilization
Low early morbidity, mortality Less 
invasive
No cross-clamping of aorta: spinal cord 
injury, reperfusion injury
Persistent infections and device infections
Higher long-term morbidity, mortality with device 
retention
Requires device explanation, reconstruction
*Potential indication; must be individualized for each patient.
†Polyester grafts, rifampin-soaked or silver-coated; less experience reported with cryopreserved arterial allografts or venous autografts.
‡Bridge procedure, used to stabilize patients until device explanation and arterial reconstruction.
Adapted from Wilson et al5 with permission of the American Heart Association, Inc. Copyright 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e434
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic 
Aortic Graft Infection
Recommendations for Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic Aortic 
Graft Infection
fmkReferenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
Diagnosis
2a B-NR
1. In patients with a prosthetic aortic graft, 
who have signs and symptoms or culture 
evidence of unexplained infection or have 
unexplained gastrointestinal bleeding, 
cross-sectional imaging is reasonable 
to evaluate for an underlying aortic graft 
infection. 1-6
Treatment
2a B-NR
2. In patients with an infected prosthetic aor-
tic graft who are hemodynamically stable 
and have appropriate anatomy, it is reason-
able to perform open surgery with either 
in situ reconstruction or extra-anatomic 
bypass. 7-13
2a B-NR
3. In patients with an infected prosthetic 
aortic graft who are hemodynamically 
unstable, it is reasonable to perform 
open surgery with either explant or in situ 
 reconstruction. 7
2a C-LD
4. In patients with an infected prosthetic aortic 
graft, endovascular therapy is reasonable, 
either as bridge therapy in those with hemo-
dynamic instability or as long-term therapy in 
those who are unsuitable candidates for open 
surgery.13-15
Late Management
1 C-LD
5. In patients who have undergone treatment 
of an acute prosthetic aortic graft infection, 
targeted intravenous antimicrobial therapy 
of at least 6 weeks’ duration, with prolonged 
suppressive oral therapy in select cases, 
plus a consultation and follow-up with an 
infectious disease specialist, is recommen
ded.7 ,11,12,16,17
2b C-LD
6. In patients with an infected prosthetic aor-
tic graft and either an extensive perigraft 
abscess or an infection caused by methicillin-
resistant S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
or a multidrug-resistant microorganism, or 
who have undergone in situ reconstruction, 
lifelong suppressive oral antimicrobial therapy 
may be considered after the initial course of 
therapy.14,15,18,19
Synopsis
Recommendations in this section apply to prosthetic 
aortic grafts. This includes tube grafts placed via open 
surgery as well as endovascular stent grafts. Although 
these grafts are typically made with Dacron or polytet-
rafluoroethylene, these recommendations also apply to 
allografts (eg, cryopreserved aorta) and autografts (eg, 
femoral vein).
Aortic graft infection is uncommon (0.3%–3%). 20-22  
Extension to the groin increases the risk of subsequent 
infection. Although some studies suggest a lower risk 
with endovascular versus open repair, the EVAR-1 (UK 
Endovascular Aneurysm Repair 1) RCT and a large 
Medicare analysis found equivalent rates of graft infec-
tion.23-25 Common sources of infection include: contami-
nation at the time of implantation; graft enteric erosion or 
fistula to adjacent bowel, esophagus, or airway; or, rarely, 
hematogenous spread from remote infection. Suspicion 
is usually raised by symptoms, laboratory test abnormali-
ties, or axial imaging findings. In the presence of an aor-
tic graft infection, no surgical option is clearly superior. 
Basic tenets are to remove all infected tissue, includ-
ing the graft and surrounding tissue, reconstruction of 
distal flow either as an extra-anatomic or in situ bypass, 
and coverage of the contaminated field with omen-
tum, muscle flaps, or pleura. Previously, extra-anatomic 
bypass followed 24 to 48 hours later by graft explant and 
oversewing of the aortic stump was considered the gold 
standard for abdominal aortic infection but is usually not 
appropriate for the thoracic aorta. Aortic allografts, deep 
vein, and silver-impregnated or rifampin-soaked pros-
thetic grafts placed in situ have all shown good results 
as well, often with lower complication rates. A 6-week 
course of intravenous antibiotics is typically used, some-
times followed by long-term oral suppressive therapy.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Early graft infection (≤3 mo) is often associated 
with fever and back pain, whereas late graft infec-
tions (>3 mo) may have an insidious onset with 
symptoms of fatigue and malaise, or may have 
fever, an elevated white blood cell count, eryth-
rocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, or 
advanced signs of sepsis with hemodynamic insta-
bility or frank hemorrhage from rupture or fistulae 
to adjacent bowel, esophagus, or airway. Because 
these signs and symptoms are nonspecific for site 
of infection, the initial workup should include basic 
blood work, blood cultures, and axial imaging, pref-
erably with CTA. In those patients with bleeding, 
endoscopy may be used to rule out other causes 
and potentially temporize bleeding. Findings of 
graft infection on CT include peri-graft air, abscess, 
inflammatory changes, pseudoaneurysms, or frank 
hemorrhage. CTA has a sensitivity of 94% and 
specificity of 85% to 100% with advanced graft 
infection, but the sensitivity is only 64% for those 
with low-grade infection. 1,2 The sensitivity and 
specificity for low-grade infection may be increased 
from 77% to 93% and 70% to 89%, respectively, 
with the use of PET-CT.3-5 MRI, tagged white blood 
cell scans, or both may also be useful, depending 
on local expertise and availability.6
2. Extra-anatomic bypass with subsequent graft 
explant, aortic stump oversewing, and omental cov-
erage has a reasonably low rate of reinfection but a 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e435
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
relatively high rate of amputation and occlusion and 
is susceptible to stump blow-out. 7, 8 In situ venous 
reconstruction has the lowest rate of reinfection 
but is associated with long operative times, size 
mismatch, and lower extremity venous morbidity. 7, 9 
Cryopreserved allografts have a low rate of rein-
fection (similar to vein) but are susceptible to early 
and late degeneration, may have limited lengths 
and diameters, and have limited availability for 
emergencies.7 ,10,11 Rifampin- or silver- impregnated 
prosthetic grafts are more readily available and 
faster to implant than vein or extra-anatomic repair 
but are more susceptible to reinfection.7 ,26 None of 
these graft options is clearly superior to the others 
and, as such, in the stable patient without extensive 
infection with resistant organisms, the use of any 
of these is acceptable. 27 For those with extensive 
peri-graft abscess, or infection with methicillin-
resistant S. aureus, Pseudomonas, or multidrug 
resistant organisms, extra-anatomic reconstruction 
(when feasible) or in situ reconstruction with femo-
ral vein or allograft may offer improved freedom 
from reinfection.7 ,13,26
3. Hemodynamically unstable patients require emer-
gency proximal control with a clamp or balloon, and 
rapid in-line reconstruction, which is best performed 
with either an allograft (if immediately available) or 
a silver- or rifampin-impregnated prosthetic graft.7
4. Endovascular intervention allows relatively rapid 
control of hemorrhage and may improve survival 
in patients with an aorto-enteric fistula, when used 
as a bridge to definitive therapy. 13-15 For patients 
who are not candidates for surgical graft excision, 
endovascular therapy may be considered for defin-
itive therapy, in which case lifelong antibiotic sup-
pression should be considered.
5. Consultation with an infectious disease specialist 
is recommended for all patients with aortic graft 
infection. A 6-week course of intravenous antimi-
crobial therapy has been recommended in multiple 
reports from high-volume centers and in scientific 
statements.7 ,11,16,17 ,26,28 For Pseudomonas or mul-
tidrug resistant organisms, multiple antimicrobial 
agents may be needed. A subsequent course of 
oral antimicrobial therapy for 3 to 6 months may 
be considered depending on the specific organism, 
the extent of infection, and the type of repair.
6. Lifelong suppressive oral antimicrobial therapy 
has been suggested for selected patients, such as 
those with extensive infection, aggressive organ-
isms, in situ prosthetic replacement, or endovas-
cular coverage without resection. 14,15,18,19 Axial 
imaging is typically continued long term to iden-
tify evidence of reinfection, such as inflammatory 
changes, fluid or air collections, or pseudoaneu-
rysm formation.
9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease
Recommendations for Atherosclerotic Disease
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD
1. In patients with aortic atherosclerotic 
disease and concomitant coronary artery 
disease, PAD or both, it is recommended to 
prescribe antiplatelet therapy, anticoagu-
lant therapy or both, guided by the clinical 
 setting.1-3
2a C-LD
2. In patients with aortic atherosclerotic 
disease and risk factors for confirmed 
coronary artery disease, it is reasonable 
to prescribe a moderate- or high-intensity 
statin. 4-6
2b C-LD
3. In patients with aortic atheromas of a thick-
ness ≥4 mm, statin therapy may be reason-
able.1,7-9
Synopsis
Atherosclerosis is a chronic immunoinflammatory, fibro-
proliferative disease of the aorta and its branches that 
is propagated by lipids. 10 This disease process has mul-
tiple risk factors and begins early in life so that the aorta 
may develop extensive disease over many decades. 11 
The diagnosis of aortic atherosclerosis may occur inci-
dentally, during the evaluation of symptomatic vascular 
events, or both. The size and location of aortic plaques 
have been associated with embolic complications.4,7 ,8,12-16 
The presence of aortic atheromas has been significantly 
associated with all-cause death. 9 The management of 
aortic atherosclerosis includes, in general, control of risk 
factors, lifestyle modification, and appropriate pharmaco-
logical therapies. Although lifestyle changes may be the 
most important treatment strategy, compliance may be 
challenging.17 ,18
Recommendation-Specific Supporting Text
1. Patients with aortic atherosclerosis often have con-
comitant cardiovascular diseases such as coronary 
artery disease, atrial fibrillation, and PAD. These 
concomitant conditions frequently determine the 
selection of guideline-based antiplatelet agents, 
anticoagulant agents, or both.1-3
2. The indications for statin therapy in patients with 
a history of coronary artery disease, myocardial 
infarction, and stroke are well established. 5,6 The 
data for statin therapy specific to aortic atheroscle-
rosis alone are very limited. Therefore, this recom-
mendation has been made for those patients at 
risk for or with confirmed coronary artery disease 
because the available data best support statin 
therapy in this cohort.
3. Atherosclerotic disease of the aortic arch is a 
potential source of emboli to the brain. 1,2,9 A pro-
spective study (N=500) showed that the OR for 
stroke among patients with aortic atheromatous 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e436
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
plaques (atheromas) of ≥ 4 mm versus controls 
was 9.1 (95% CI, 3.3–25.2; P<0.001).7 Moreover, 
in a clinical trial of 519 patients with severe tho-
racic aortic plaques, multivariate analysis showed 
that statin therapy was protective against strokes 
(P=0.0001).8 (The data from these 2 studies 
relate specifically to atheroma thickness of ≥ 4 
mm, which does not align precisely with the most 
commonly used grading systems for severity of 
aortic atherosclerosis, which define severe ath-
eromas by a thickness of >5 mm.) Although anti-
platelet therapy is commonly used in patients with 
aortic atheromas, there is no evidence to support 
the use of prophylactic anticoagulation in this 
population.
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus
Aortic mural thrombus is typically associated with under-
lying aortic pathology, such as aneurysm, aortitis, athero-
sclerosis, dissection, and aortic graft material.1-3 Because 
such thrombi arise in the setting of underlying aortic 
pathology, the thrombi can be considered “secondary,” 
and they most often appear in the descending thoracic 
and abdominal aorta. 1-3 In contrast, “primary” thrombus 
occurs in a normal or minimally atherosclerotic aorta and, 
rather than being mural, are often pedunculated and pro-
trude into the aortic lumen. Most often, primary aortic 
thrombi are idiopathic, but some have been associated 
with hypercoagulable states (eg, malignancy, heparin-
induced thrombocytopenia, and the antiphospholipid 
syndrome).2-6
Aortic thrombus is most often asymptomatic but may 
present with limb ischemia, visceral ischemia, or stroke2-7 
from embolization. The diagnosis is often typically con-
firmed by either CTA or TEE. 8,9 Asymptomatic patients 
with secondary mural thrombus are usually managed 
conservatively, but patients with primary aortic thrombus 
or those presenting with embolic events are often man-
aged with anticoagulation, endovascular intervention, or 
open surgical therapy; such treatments are informed by 
the patient’s history and the location, size, and mobil-
ity of the thrombus. 2-7 ,10,11 Long-term anticoagulation is 
most often considered in patients with thrombus in the 
ascending aorta and aortic arch, because of the increased 
risk of stroke from potential embolization should aortic 
thrombus recur.5-7 ,10
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion
Aortic occlusion, which occurs most often secondary to 
extensive atherosclerotic disease, can present along a 
spectrum of acute and chronic clinical courses. CTA is 
most useful in identifying the occlusion, determining its 
cause, and defining the extent of associated aortic and 
branch arterial disease. Aortic occlusion typically occurs 
below the renal arteries but rarely can arise above this 
level, leading to renal and possibly visceral malperfusion.
Treatment in acute presentations is typically surgical, 
including open embolectomy in the setting of embolus or 
aorto-iliac and femoral reconstruction for atherosclerotic 
occlusion.1 Chronic aortic occlusion can occasionally be 
asymptomatic because collateral circulation has devel-
oped, in which case intervention may not be required. 
More commonly, patients with chronic aortic occlusion 
present with lower extremity claudication that may be 
accompanied by buttock claudication, central core mus-
cle weakness, and impotence in males caused by pelvic 
malperfusion. These patients often have cardiopulmonary 
comorbidities and multifocal atherosclerotic disease, and 
these issues should be addressed preoperatively to miti-
gate potential complications.
Revascularization options include endovascular, 2 
open aortic (eg, aortobifemoral bypass), 3 or extra-ana-
tomic (eg, axillofemoral bypass), and hybrid options (eg, 
iliofemoral endarterectomy and patch plus iliac stenting). 
The preferred revascularization strategy is informed by 
the arterial anatomy, the severity of disease and symp-
toms, the patient’s substrate, and the expected proce-
dural durability. No RCTs have shown an advantage for 
any given revascularization procedure, and all perform 
well in early follow-up. Open aortic reconstruction has 
improved long-term patency compared with less inva-
sive options3 but at a cost of a higher risk of periopera-
tive complications.
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta
“Porcelain” aorta refers to the extensive, eggshell-like, 
near-circumferential or circumferential calcification of 
the intima or media of the aortic wall in the ascend-
ing aorta or aortic arch. It is most often associated with 
late-stage atherosclerosis, although it can also be a 
late consequence of aortitis. It generally occurs in older 
patients with atherosclerotic disease elsewhere and 
carries an increased risk for cardiovascular events and 
mortality.1 Porcelain aorta is best seen on a noncontrast 
CT scan, although very thin calcification may only be 
detected intraoperatively with epi-aortic ultrasound or 
manual palpation.Impenetrable ascending aortic calci-
fication makes it difficult, if not impossible, to perform 
central aortic cannulation for cardiopulmonary bypass, 
the anastomosis of proximal coronary bypass grafts to 
the aorta, aortotomy during aortic valve replacement, 
and graft-aorta anastomoses during aortic replace-
ment. Additionally, performing aortic cross-clamping for 
cardiopulmonary bypass can crack the calcified wall, 
increasing the risk of stroke from embolization, or imme-
diate exsanguination. Surgical management strategies 
have included use of alternative sites for cannulation 
and proximal bypass grafts with off-pump or beating 
heart techniques, 2-4 balloon occlusion of the aorta, 5 
and the use of circulatory arrest with ascending aortic 
replacement.6
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e437
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and 
Congenital Abnormalities of the Arch
CoA is a narrowing of the aorta occurring most often 
just distal to the left subclavian artery, typically with an 
aneurysmal aortic segment immediately beyond the 
stenosis, but variants are frequent. 1 Significant CoA 
presents with upper extremity hypertension and lower 
extremity hypotension (Table 37). MRI and CT are both 
useful to evaluate the extent of aortic narrowing and 
dilation, as well as the presence of collaterals, 2 whereas 
TTE is useful for evaluating the gradient across the 
CoA, as well as identifying a coexisting BAV (pres-
ent in 50%) and other potential congenital defects. 3 
Untreated CoA may be complicated by aortic dissec-
tion, heart failure, ruptured cerebral aneurysm, dis-
tal hypoperfusion, or the consequences of significant 
hypertension. Late complications following surgical or 
endovascular CoA repair may include undersized grafts, 
recurrent stenosis, aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm for-
mation, and rupture, which are typically treated with 
endovascular procedures unless anatomic features dic-
tate open or hybrid surgery.4-11 Hypertension is common 
after CoA repair, especially during exercise, and when 
the repair is performed in adults. 12,13 Ambulatory BP 
monitoring and exercise testing are useful in diagnosis 
and management. 12,13 Patients with CoA undergo life-
long follow-up and imaging because of the associated 
cardiovascular risks and the potential requirement for 
repeat intervention. 6,14
An aberrant subclavian artery (ASCA) is commonly 
an incidental finding but may present with compressive 
symptoms (including dysphagia and dyspnea) because 
it courses posterior to the esophagus and trachea and 
may associate with aneurysm disevase. 15-18 A normal 
left aortic arch with a right ASCA occurs in ∼ 1% of the 
population, whereas a right aortic arch with a left ASCA 
is much rarer and may form a vascular ring. 17 ,18 Dilation 
of the origin of either a right or left ASCA occurs in 
20% to 60% of cases and is known as a Kommerell 
diverticulum.15,18 Such Kommerell diverticula may lead 
to aortic dissection, rupture, or embolization. 18-20 Indica-
tions for treatment of ASCA relate to symptoms and 
aneurysm size.
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta
Recommendations for CoA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in the Online Data Supplement.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR
1. In patients with CoA, including those who 
have undergone surgical or endovascular 
intervention, an MRI or CT is recommended 
for initial, surveillance, and follow-up aortic 
imaging.1-4
1 C-EO
2. In patients with CoA, BPs should be mea-
sured in both arms and one of the lower 
extremities.
1 B-NR
3. In patients with significant native or recurrent 
CoA (Table 37) and hypertension, endovascular 
stenting or open surgical repair of the coarcta-
tion is  recommended.2,3,5-12
1 C-EO
4. In patients with CoA, guideline-directed medi-
cal therapy is recommended for the treatment 
of hypertension.13
2b B-NR
5. In adult patients with CoA, screening for 
intracranial aneurysms by MRI or CT may be 
reasonable.14-18
Synopsis
CoA may have many anatomic variants and occurs most 
commonly at the level of the ductus arteriosus and dis-
tal to the left subclavian artery. Echocardiogram is indi-
cated in the evaluation of patients with CoA because a 
BAV coexists in at least 50% of cases, and CoA may 
associate with complex congenital heart disease.4 Upper 
extremity hypertension and lower extremity hypoperfu-
sion are the hallmarks of CoA. Intracranial aneurysms 
may occur in adults with CoA. 14-16 Ascending aortic 
aneurysms may occur in those with BAV, and aneu-
rysms may be present in the distal arch and descend-
ing aorta. 2,11,19,20 Untreated CoA may be complicated 
by aortic dissection, heart failure, ruptured cerebral 
aneurysm, or complications from hypertension. Repair 
of CoA is performed by endovascular, open surgical, 
and hybrid procedures, depending on patient-specific 
and anatomic features. 2,3,5,8-12 In patients with previous 
procedures, late complications may include recurrent 
stenosis, aneurysm or pseudoaneurysm formation, rup-
ture, and persistent hypertension. 2,3,6,8,12,21 Hypertension 
is common after CoA repair, especially during exercise, 
and ambulatory monitoring and exercise testing may be 
useful in diagnosis and management. 3,6,7 ,22-24 Lifelong 
clinical and imaging follow-up is important to evaluate 
for hypertension, recurrent coarctation, and aortic wall 
abnormalities after repair. 1,2,6,24
Table 37. Criteria for Signiﬁcant CoA11,28
The presence of signiﬁcant CoA is based on evidence of upper extremity 
hypertension (at rest, on ambulatory BP monitoring, or with pathologic 
blood  pressure response to exercise) or left ventricular hypertrophy and 
evidence for 1 of these gradient measurements:
1. A noninvasive blood pressure difference of >20 mm Hg between the 
upper and lower extremities
2. A peak-to-peak gradient of >20 mm Hg across the coarct by catheter-
ization; or a peak-to-peak gradient of >10 mm Hg across the coarct by 
catheterization in the setting of decreased left ventricular systolic func-
tion or signiﬁcant collateral ﬂow
3. A mean gradient of >20 mm Hg across the coarct by Doppler echo-
cardiography; or a mean gradient of >10 mm Hg across the coarct by 
Doppler  echocardiography in the setting of decreased left ventricular 
systolic function or signiﬁcant collateral ﬂow
CoA indicates coarctation of the aorta.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e438
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with CoA, both MRI and CT are can 
detect coexistent BAV, examine the full thoracic 
aorta for coexistent aneurysm disease or arch 
abnormalities, and assist in treatment planning. 4,25 
TTE is also can detect the gradients across the 
site of the coarctation and assess for recoarctation 
(recurrence of a significant coarct). After repair of 
CoA, complications may occur, including recoarc-
tation, aortic aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, and aor-
tic dissection.2,3,11,12,26 Arch and descending aortic 
complications are better visualized by MRI or CT 
than TTE. The optimal imaging frequency after 
repair of CoA is not well established and is best 
individualized based on the type of repair, physical 
examination findings, and previous imaging find-
ings.27 After establishing stable aortic imaging after 
CoA repair, surveillance imaging is often obtained 
every 3 to 5 years. 20,28-30 Recoarctation occurs in 
about 10% 6,8 after surgical repair and about 8% 
after balloon dilation. 21 After endovascular repair 
of CoA, MRI or CT can evaluate for complications, 
recoarctation, or endoleaks.2,3,11
2. Patients with a significant CoA typically have 
hypertension in the upper extremities and a reduc-
tion in BP in the lower extremities. The location of 
the CoA will inform any BP differential between 
the left and right arms. Physical examination may 
reveal a delay in timing and a decreased amplitude 
of the femoral pulse. After CoA repair, recurrent 
coarctation may occur. Obtaining the BP in the 
upper and lower extremities assesses for native 
and recurrent coarctation.
3. CoA presents with upper extremity hypertension, 
lower extremity hypoperfusion, and imaging confir-
mation of narrowing of the aorta that may include 
collateral formation.2,3,6,11 Significant native or reco-
arctation has been variably defined, but commonly 
used criteria are listed in Table 37 . 7 ,11 The pres-
ence of left ventricular hypertrophy is an important 
marker of disease.28 In addition to abnormal aortic 
gradients, anatomic evidence for CoA is necessary 
and is well characterized by MRI or CT. Adult con-
genital guidelines have reported the best evidence 
to proceed with intervention to correct CoA, includ-
ing hypertension, BP differential between upper 
and lower extremities, and TTE-derived gradients 
across the coarctation.11 For individuals with native 
or recurrent CoA and appropriate anatomic char-
acteristics, endovascular treatment with stenting is 
typically performed.2,3,6,9-12,29 Open surgical repair of 
CoA may include subclavian flap aortoplasty, resec-
tion and end-to-end anastomosis, interposition 
grafting, or bypass grafting, with the choice of pro-
cedure informed by patient- and anatomic-specific 
characteristics.5,11 In adults who have undergone 
a previous open surgical CoA repair and develop 
recoarctation, aneurysm, or pseudoaneurysm, an 
endovascular approach (assuming there is ade-
quate iliofemoral access and absence of involve-
ment of the supra-aortic trunks) avoids the need 
for reoperation.2,3,9,12,29
4. Patients with CoA are at risk for complications of 
hypertension, including heart failure, stroke, coro-
nary artery disease, and aortic complications, so 
hypertension should be assessed and in accor-
dance with current guidelines. 13 Multiple studies 
have shown that persistent hypertension is com-
mon after CoA correction. 3,6,7 ,23,24 Ambulatory BP 
monitoring and exercise testing may be useful in 
the evaluation and treatment of hypertension in 
patients with native CoA and after repair.3,22,24
5. Screening studies suggest that adults with CoA 
have an 10% prevalence of intracranial aneurysms 
(compared with a prevalence of 2% in the normal 
adult population), with the greatest risk among 
older adults and those with hypertension. 14-16,18 
Cost-effective analysis supports screening for 
intracranial aneurysms in adults with CoA, but 
preferred screening strategies remain unknown. 17 
Because many of the intracranial aneurysms 
detected by screening will be very small and not 
require treatment, shared decision-making about 
screening may be informed by age, risk factors, 
and anticoagulation considerations.18,30
9.4.2. Other Arch Abnormalities
9.4.2.1. Aberrant Subclavian Artery, Kommerell’s 
Diverticulum
Recommendations for Aberrant Subclavian Artery, Kommerell’s 
Diverticulum
COR LOE Recommendations
2a C-LD
1. In patients discovered to have an ASCA 
in the absence of thoracic aortic imaging, 
dedicated imaging to assess for TAA is 
 reasonable.1,2
2b C-LD
2. In patients with Kommerell’s diverticulum, 
depending on patient anatomy and comor-
bidities, repair may be reasonable when 
the diverticulum orifice is >3.0 cm, the 
combined diameter of the diverticulum and 
adjacent descending aorta is >5.0 cm, or 
both (Figure 27). 3
Synopsis
Anomalies of the aortic arch are usually detected inci-
dentally on a CT of the chest or neck ordered for other 
reasons. An ASCA arises as the fourth branch from the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e439
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
aorta, distal to the left subclavian artery (or right sub-
clavian artery in the case of a right-sided aortic arch). It 
courses through the posterior mediastinum behind the 
esophagus in its path to perfuse the arm and can cause 
a vascular ring around the trachea and esophagus that 
results in dysphagia, respiratory symptoms, or recur-
rent laryngeal nerve palsy. Kommerell’s diverticulum is a 
persistent remnant of the fourth primitive dorsal aortic 
arch because of failed regression 3 and may be present 
in 20% to 60% of patients with an aberrant right or left 
subclavian artery. The risk of rupture or dissection of a 
Kommerell’s diverticulum has been reported to be as 
high as 50% in case series, although high-quality data on 
the natural history are very limited. The 2020 SVS clinical 
practice guidelines recommend surgical intervention for 
Kommerell’s diverticulum when the diverticulum orifice is 
>3.0 cm, the combined diameter of the diverticulum and 
adjacent descending aorta is >5.0 cm, or both.4 Success-
ful repair has been described using open, endovascular, 
and hybrid approaches depending on patient anatomy 
and comorbidities.3
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Variant aortic arch anatomy has been found to be 
significantly associated with TAA in several single-
center retrospective observational series, 1 with 
33% of patients with right-sided aortic arch having 
concomitant TAA.2 Left-sided aortic arch with aber-
rant right subclavian artery was also significantly 
associated with TAD but only occurred in 2% to 
8% of those patients. 1 Consequently, if the imag-
ing study that detected the ASCA did not include 
imaging of the thoracic aorta, then a dedicated CT 
or MRI to evaluate for an associated aortic aneu-
rysm is reasonable.
2. Case series have reported rupture and/or dissec-
tion of Kommerell’s diverticulum for diverticula 
ranging from 4.0 cm to 10 cm (mean size, 5.0 cm).3 
The measurement of the Kommerell’s diverticulum 
may be difficult, and various strategies to stan-
dardize measures have been proposed.3 Based on 
CT, 2 diameter measurements should be obtained 
(Figure 27) using cross-sectional imaging: the 
diverticulum orifice (radially and longitudinally at 
the aortic wall) and the combined diameter of the 
diverticulum and adjacent descending thoracic 
aorta (measured from the tip of the diverticulum 
to the opposite aortic wall6). Repair of Kommerell’s 
diverticulum has been suggested when the orifice 
diameter is >3 cm or the combined diameter of 
the diverticulum and adjacent descending thoracic 
aorta is >5.0 cm.3,4,7
9.4.2.2. Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
Recommendation for Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
COR LOE Recommendation
2a C-EO
1. In patients with an aberrant left vertebral 
artery origin arising directly from the thoracic 
aorta who require aortic repair involving recon-
struction or coverage of the vertebral artery 
origin, revascularization of the vertebral artery 
is reasonable.
Synopsis
The most common anatomic variant for the left verte-
bral artery is arising directly from the aortic arch; 6% 
of adults have a left vertebral artery that arises from 
the arch between the left carotid and left subclavian 
arteries, 1,2 rather than of a branch of the left subcla-
vian artery. There is a paucity of data on the manage-
ment of the left vertebral artery arising from the aortic 
arch in patients undergoing thoracic aortic repair. 
For patients undergoing elective open surgical par-
tial or total arch repair or undergoing TEVAR for TAA 
Figure 27. Measurements of Kommerell’s Diverticulum.
Two diameter measurements should be obtained using cross-
sectional imaging: the diverticulum orifice (radially and longitudinally 
at the aortic wall) and the combined diameter of the diverticulum and 
adjacent descending thoracic aorta (measured from the apex of the 
diverticulum to the opposite aortic wall). ARSA indicates aberrant right 
subclavian artery; LCA, left common carotid artery; LSA, left subclavian 
artery; and RCA, right common carotid artery. Adapted from Erben 
et al,7 Copyright 2020, with permission from Elsevier, Inc., and the 
Society for Vascular Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e440
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
or dissection, revascularization of the left subclavian 
artery is recommended to preserve left vertebral artery 
perfusion and reduce the risk of symptomatic verte-
brobasilar insufficiency, SCI, and stroke. 3 This may be 
particularly important in patients with a dominant left 
vertebral artery or a nonintact circle of Willis. Verte-
bral artery revascularization via either an open bypass 
or transposition technique can be accomplished with 
good outcomes. 3,4
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients undergoing elective TEVAR with planned 
left subclavian artery coverage, preoperative revas-
cularization of the left subclavian artery has been 
shown to decrease the risk of stroke and SCI, 5-8 
presumably by maintaining perfusion through the 
posterior circulation via the left vertebral artery. In 
a small series of 9 patients with an aberrant left 
vertebral artery origin undergoing open aortic arch 
replacement, no neurologic complications were 
reported among patients who first underwent 
revascularization of the left vertebral artery.4
9.4.2.3. Bovine Arch (Common Innominate and Left 
Carotid Artery)
Recommendation for Bovine Arch (Common Innominate and Left 
Carotid Artery)
COR LOE Recommendation
2b C-LD
1. In patients with bovine arch (common 
innominate and left carotid artery), 
imaging to assess for TAA may be 
 reasonable. 1-3
Synopsis
The most common anatomic pattern of great vessel ori-
gin, occurring in approximately 70% of adults, is a type I 
arch, in which the 3 great vessels originate directly from 
the aorta. 4 Bovine arch variants are the most common 
arch anomalies, and 2 types are described: In type II-A, 
found in 9% of the population, the left common carotid 
artery arises directly from the innominate artery (Figure 
28); in type II-B, found in 13% of the population, the 
innominate and left common carotid arteries arise from 
a common origin (Figure 28). 5 The term “bovine arch” is 
a misnomer, because the arch vasculature in cattle has a 
single, large brachiocephalic vessel that subsequently tri-
furcates into 2 subclavian arteries and a bicarotid trunk.5 
Others have referred to the bovine aortic arch pattern as 
an aortic arch with a common origin of the innominate 
and left carotid artery.
Some authors have suggested that a bovine arch 
increases the risk of aortic dissection, but the data are 
limited.2,6 Among patients with acute type A aortic dis-
section, a bovine arch was highly predictive of an arch 
tear (OR, 5.9; 95% CI, 2.89–12.04; P<0.001) and 
increased perioperative stroke (OR, 2.69; 95% CI, 1.2–
6.0; P=0.016) based on multivariable analysis, although 
it was not associated with worse long-term survival.7
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. A bovine aortic arch appears to be a marker for 
TAD and more rapid aortic expansion. 1 Among 
patients with TAD, the prevalence of a bovine arch 
was 26.3%, compared with 16.4% in controls 
Figure 28. Normal and Bovine Aortic Arch Configurations.
(A) T ype I aortic arch: The normal aortic arch configuration. (B) T ype II-A aortic arch: The left common carotid artery originates from the 
innominate artery. (C) T ype II-B aortic arch: The innominate and left common carotid arteries share a common origin. LCA indicates left common 
carotid artery; LSA, left subclavian artery; L VA, left vertebral artery; RCA, right common carotid artery; RSA, right subclavian artery; and RVA, right 
vertebral artery. Adapted from Layton et al.5 Copyright 2006, American Society of Neuroradiology. Used with permission from Mayo Foundation 
for Medical Education and Research, all rights reserved.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e441
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
(P<0.001). Moreover, among patients with TAA, the 
annual aortic growth rate was 0.29 cm/y among 
those with a bovine arch versus 0.09 cm/y among 
those with normal arch anatomy. A recent meta-
analysis found that the proportion of TAD among 
patients with bovine arch was 41.5%, compared 
with 34.0% among patients with standard arch con-
figuration.3 If aortic dilation or aneurysm is found on 
imaging, subsequent surveillance imaging may be 
obtained.
9.5. Tumors
Tumors of the thoracic aorta are usually secondary, 
resulting from contiguous or metastatic spread of primary 
malignancies, especially lung and esophageal.1,2 Primary 
malignant tumors of the aorta, which are extremely rare, 
are most often primary sarcomas that protrude into the 
lumen but leave the aortic wall intact. Aortic sarcomas 
are aggressive tumors with a propensity for arterial 
embolization, disseminated metastases, and rapid clini-
cal deterioration,3,4 usually with limited survival after initial 
diagnosis.5,6 Tumors of the thoracoabdominal aorta may 
exhibit nonspecific symptoms. On imaging, aortic tumors 
are often initially mistaken for atherosclerosis or aneurys-
mal disease7 (although PET imaging may suggest tumor 
metabolic activity over metabolically quiescent athero-
sclerosis), so the diagnosis is often made by histologic 
examination of embolic debris or surgical specimens 8-10; 
in some cases, the diagnosis is made postmortem. Com-
bined therapy with surgery (resection and reconstruc-
tion of the segment of aorta containing the neoplasm) 
and chemoradiotherapy provide the best survival results, 
although the overall prognosis remains poor.
10. PHYSICAL ACTIVITY AND QUALITY  
OF LIFE
Recommendations for Physical Activity and Quality of Life
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO
1. For patients with significant aortic dis-
ease, education and guidance should be 
provided about avoiding intense isomet-
ric exercises (eg, heavy weightlifting or 
activities requiring the Valsalva maneuver), 
burst exertion and activities, and collision 
sports. 1,2
1 C-EO
2. For patients who have undergone sur-
gery for aortic aneurysm or dissection, 
postoperative cardiac rehabilitation is 
 recommended.3,4
2a C-LD
3. In patients with thoracic or abdominal aortic 
aneurysms whose BP is adequately con-
trolled, it is reasonable to encourage 30 to 
60 minutes of mild-to-moderate intensity 
aerobic activity at least 3 to 4 days per 
week.5,6
2a C-LD
4. For patients with clinically significant 
aortic disease, it is reasonable to screen 
for anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic 
stress disorder and, when indicated, provide 
resources for support 7, 8; it is also reason-
able to provide education and resources to 
minimize patients’ concerns, support opti-
mal decision-making, and enhance quality 
of life. 5,9-11
Synopsis
As surgical outcomes for aortic disease improve, a focus 
on patient-reported health-related quality of life (HRQOL) 
outcomes is becoming increasingly important,10 because 
patients have become increasingly concerned about 
HRQOL issues such as returning to work, pain manage-
ment, risk of infection, activity recommendations and 
restrictions, and neurologic complications. The most com-
mon measures of HRQOL are generic patient-reported 
outcome measures (eg, SF-36), although validated aneu-
rysm-specific measures have been developed.7 ,12,13
In patients with Marfan syndrome in the GenTAC reg-
istry, HRQOL was slightly below the population norm. 
Better HRQOL was independently associated with 
socioeconomic factors (eg, private insurance, active 
employment) but not factors related to disease sever-
ity or comorbidities.14,15 Although aneurysms are usually 
asymptomatic before diagnosis, surgical aortic repair 
is associated with an initial deterioration in HRQOL at 
3 months, including decreased physical, cognitive, and 
social function that generally returns to preoperative 
levels after 6 to 12 months. 11 Standardized reporting 
of preoperative and postoperative HRQOL measures is 
needed to guide further improvements in interventional 
strategies and improve the overall patient experience.16
Patients with aortic aneurysms, who have adequate 
BP control, may have improvements in overall cardio-
vascular health when undertaking moderate intensity 
aerobic activity at least 3 to 4 days per week, 30 to 
60 minutes per session.17-19 Although resistance training 
may be beneficial to patients with cardiovascular disease, 
it increases central aortic BP and, therefore, benefits for 
those with aortic aneurysm are less well understood 
because, theoretically, increases in BP could contribute 
to subsequent aortic growth, complications, or both. Fur-
ther longitudinal study is warranted.20-22
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with aortic disease, limited data are 
available to guide recommendations regarding the 
forms of exercise that are safe and promote car-
diovascular health versus those that pose an acute 
or long-term risk of aortic growth or rupture. But 
Recommendations for Physical Activity and Quality of Life (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e442
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
evidence exists regarding the physiologic ben-
efits of exercise and the hemodynamic conse-
quences of various form of exercise and exertion 
in case series and relevant animal models. There 
has been a uniform consensus among numer-
ous expert committees on aortic disease that it is 
wise to avoid intense isometric exertion or exer-
cises that require the Valsalva maneuver, given 
that heavy lifting with Valsalva can produce acute 
increases in SBP to >300 mm Hg. There is also a 
consensus that light weightlifting and low-intensity 
aerobic exercise are safe and likely improve both 
physical and mental health. No uniform consen-
sus exists about the safety of intermediate-level 
static and aerobic exercise. Recommendations for 
exercise intensity are best individualized, informed 
by multiple factors that include underlying aortic 
pathology, aortic diameter and ASI, aortic growth 
rate, age, family history, and any other high-risk 
features (eg, uncontrolled hypertension). Ongoing 
investigation is needed to better define the levels 
of resistance activities that would be considered 
low-risk for adverse aortic events, favoring greater 
exercise restrictions among patients at higher risk 
of dissection.17 ,23-26,27
2. Although data are limited, cardiac rehabilitation has 
been shown to be useful and safe for patients after 
aortic surgery.4,5,27 ,28 A randomized trial of exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation in patients who have 
undergone surgery for type A aortic dissection 
showed improved peak oxygen uptake, maximal 
workload, and HRQOL. 3 Fear of a repeat cardiac 
event can cause patients who are post–aortic dis-
section to decrease or stop exercise and sexual 
activity, but mild-to-moderate intensity exercise 
may be cardioprotective. Because of decondition-
ing, patients may be unable to exercise initially at 
the recommended level. 27 An intensity of 3 to 5 
metabolic equivalents of task is recommended, 
while avoiding strenuous lifting, lifting to the point 
of exhaustion, or other activities that entail maximal 
exertion.6,29 In a retrospective study, patients with 
small AAA went through a modified cardiac rehabil-
itation program before surgery, and the rate of aor-
tic growth was slower in the rehabilitation group.28
3. High-intensity athletic training in 1 study has been 
shown to be an independent predictor of aortic 
growth, although these data were limited to the 
aortic root and did not include AAA. 30 In a recent 
study in 442 athletes of mean age 61 years, aortic 
root enlargement by z-score was present in 24% 
of participants and, after multivariate analysis, elite 
competitor status was found to be an independent 
predictor of aortic growth. 31 Less is known about 
the potential effects of mild-to-moderate intensity 
aerobic activity on aortic growth, but it is known 
to improve overall cardiovascular health, includ-
ing among patients with TAA 32-34 and AAA. 20,35,36 
A recent meta-analysis suggests that that higher 
physical activity is associated with a reduced risk 
of AAA.37 In 1 study of a mouse model of Marfan 
syndrome, rates of aortic root growth were signifi-
cant slower in mice that exercised daily on a tread-
mill compared with sedentary mice. 38 In another 
study of mice with Marfan syndrome, both mild and 
moderate—but not strenuous—aerobic exercise 
protected the structural integrity of the aortic wall, 
as evidenced by reduced elastin fragmentation and 
reduced expression of matrix metalloproteinases 2 
and 9 within the aortic wall, compared with seden-
tary controls.39
4. Depression and anxiety often occur in patients 
with aortic disease, regardless of surgical status. 
Posttraumatic stress disorder after dissection is 
a particular risk. 8 Screening patients and provid-
ing resources for assistance may prevent mental 
health issues from becoming more severe and 
lead to an increased HRQOL. 9,40 The SF-36 is a 
common tool for assessing mental health for these 
patients7 ,11,12,41 but may not cover all patient con-
cerns, such as activity restriction, family life, and 
losing ability to earn income. 16 More studies are 
needed with both pre- and postoperative HRQOL 
data to improve shared decision-making and 
patient outcomes. 12,13,41 Exercise may decrease 
depression.9 Education before procedures helps 
most patients feel more satisfied with their pro-
cedures16 and improve postoperative HRQOL. 41 
Patients and clinicians can define surgery success 
differently, showing the importance of discussing 
expectations and risks.
11. COST AND VALUE CONSIDERATIONS
Although assessment of cost and value in development 
of guidelines is of growing importance, studies are lim-
ited on the cost-effectiveness of aortic disease treat-
ment and lack standard methods for comparison.1
Screening for AAA among men ≥65 years of age has 
been shown to be cost-effective, 2,3 although data for 
screening women are less clear. Women have a lower 
incidence of AAA but higher risk of rupture and longer 
life expectancy, so incremental cost-effectiveness is sim-
ilar to men and may justify screening, especially in those 
with a history of smoking.4
In patients with AAA, studies comparing EVAR to 
open surgical repair generally show lower initial costs for 
EVAR based on shorter hospital stays; however, ongoing 
expenses for EVAR surveillance and reinterventions may 
minimize long-term cost advantages after 2 to 5 years.5-9  
In addition, significant variability in costs across organiza-
tions and countries, and changing efficiencies in tech-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e443
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
niques, makes it difficult to make recommendations on 
preferred interventional approaches based primarily on 
relative costs.6,10,11
Findings are mixed but similar for descending TAA, 
with trends toward lower initial hospital costs with 
TEVAR compared with open surgery stemming from 
shorter length of stay, but the long-term results are more 
neutral.12-14
Few data examine the cost-effectiveness of manage-
ment strategies of TAA. For the management of AAS, the 
costs are not easily modifiable. However, for manage-
ment of chronic TAD, patients often see a host of spe-
cialists, including both cardiologists and surgeons, have 
follow-up visits with specialists in both the community 
and at tertiary or quaternary centers, or both. Moreover, 
diagnostic imaging is often duplicated because of differ-
ences in imaging protocols or quality, or simply because 
images are not readily transferrable. Consequently, there 
are likely opportunities for significant cost savings if 
redundant clinician visits and imaging could be reduced 
through common protocols, common imaging platforms, 
and coordinated care.15
12. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
Most of the current recommendations for patients with 
aortic disease are based on expert opinion and data 
from observational studies, large registries, and pro-
spective studies, but few are from randomized clinical 
trials. More data are needed from basic science stud-
ies and RCTs to guide prevention, early diagnosis, and 
advanced treatment for aortic disease. In the future, 
precision medicine and patient-centered approaches 
will enable clinicians to develop care plans to optimize 
outcomes for each patient. Future research should 
include diverse populations and examine race, ethnicity, 
and sex differences to ensure that all patient groups are 
represented and that questions pertinent to their aortic 
health are answered.
12.1. Biomarker Studies
Although interest in using circulating biomarkers for risk 
stratification of patients with aortopathy has increased, 
biomarker expression has not been clearly associated 
with relevant clinical aortic events. Most studies have 
focused on protein-based biomarkers and noncoding 
RNAs in patients with bicuspid aortopathy. These emerg-
ing biomarkers and other better, early-stage biomarkers, 
along with advanced noninvasive imaging modalities, 
may help us precisely identify the risk associated with 
adverse outcomes in these patients. In addition, noncod-
ing RNAs such as microRNA are biological molecules 
whose expression can be modified through targeted 
mechanisms and present opportunities to identify new 
treatment options for patients with aortic disease. 1-7 In 
addition, developing image-based cardiac and aortic 
markers derived from large-scale imaging studies with 
automated machine learning–based analysis might pro-
vide a wealth of information for guiding the optimal care 
of these patients.
12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors
Various genes have been associated with and linked to 
TAA and dissection. Consequently, genetic testing can 
identify pathogenic mutations in specific genes that 
increase a patient’s risk of aneurysm, dissection, or both 
and may inform the optimal timing of aortic repair. As 
the prevalence of genetic testing increases, the discov-
ery of more genes will help in the earlier diagnosis of 
asymptomatic nonsyndromic TAA. In addition to the con-
tribution of genetic variants, environmental factors and 
lifestyle habits may contribute to aortic aneurysm forma-
tion. Further research on these factors may provide evi-
dence to guide lifestyle modifications that could reduce 
a patient’s lifelong aortic risk. Recent evidence suggests 
that fluoroquinolone use is associated with an increased 
risk of aortic aneurysm and dissection, but the pathways 
through which this effect is mediated are unknown. 
Future research investigating the potentially protective 
or harmful effects of other pharmacologic agents on aor-
tic health might further elucidate the pathophysiology of 
aortic disease.1-10
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta
Emerging evidence suggests that aortic diameter alone 
is an insufficient predictor of risk for aortic dissection. 
Understanding the distribution of biomechanical wall 
stress in the various anatomic locations of the aorta, 
as well as potential contributions of hemodynamic flow 
disturbances such as those from aortic valve stenosis or 
regurgitation, or even from a well-functioning BAV, may 
improve risk stratification strategies and, in turn, patient 
outcomes, filling a knowledge gap on wall stress distribu-
tion in patients with aortic aneurysms.1-4
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity
Conflicting data exist in the literature on the associa-
tion between sex and outcome in patients with aortic 
disease. Studies have shown different rates of aortic 
aneurysm growth and dissection risk in male versus 
female patients. Nevertheless, the data are inconsis-
tent, because some outcome studies indicate that sex 
affects prognosis, whereas others show no impact of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e444
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
sex. Clearly, further research is needed to elucidate 
the impact of sex on the incidence and progression 
of aortic disease, the risk of aortic dissection, and the 
outcomes of intervention. Even more challenging is the 
fact that few studies have been published on racial and 
ethnic disparities among patients with aortic disease 
and those undergoing aortic intervention. Moreover, it is 
unclear that all patients with aortic disease have equal 
access to skilled practitioners to care for them, so it is 
imperative that we seek ways to actively minimize such 
health care disparities. 1-17 Similarly, efforts should be 
made to broaden clinical trials to represent the diverse 
populations that we treat; study design, methodology, 
reporting, and implementation should be designed to be 
more inclusive. 18,19
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic 
Disease
Baseline HRQOL assessment in patients with aortic 
disease is lacking, and the few studies that have tar-
geted HRQOL have been conducted only in patients 
receiving endovascular or open aortic repair. The impact 
of physical, mental, emotional, sexual, and professional 
status on the psychosocial well-being, tolerance of med-
ical therapies, and recovery from aortic intervention has 
not been well studied. The long-term effects on physical 
and mental HRQOL after aortic repair are unknown. In 
addition, evidence-based knowledge on studies target-
ing quality of life in patients with heritable TAA is narrow 
or limited only to patients with Marfan syndrome; almost 
no studies have been performed in patients with Loeys-
Dietz syndrome or vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 
for example. Furthermore, only scattered studies have 
examined strategies for boosting the psychological 
health of patients with aortic disease and those under-
going aortic surgery. Aortic diseases require a lifetime 
of treatment and surveillance, so research is needed 
on ways to improve and sustain patient engagement, 
especially among those who are disadvantaged or at a 
lower educational level. 1-8
12.6. New Endovascular Technology
Advances in endovascular technology have dramatically 
impacted treatment strategies in patients with aortic 
disease requiring intervention. Despite this significant 
progress, current endovascular designs are limited in 
their application because of the differing hemodynamic 
and anatomic challenges presented by each segment of 
the aorta and individual differences in aortic anatomy. In 
addition, operator knowledge and experience, as well as 
methodical patient selection, are important for obtain-
ing optimal outcomes from endovascular procedures. 
Continued evolution in stent-graft design, focused on 
flexibility and durability, improved vascular imaging tech-
nology, and advances in simulation training for operators, 
will likely further reduce the risk of reinterventions and 
improve long-term outcomes.1-6
12.7 . Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation 
Protocols
Very limited research has been conducted on optimal 
exercise in patients with aortic disease. Moreover, no 
specific rehabilitation strategies exist for patients who 
still have untreated diseased aortic segments after sur-
gical aortic repair and who do not meet the surgical 
threshold for intervention. Developing patient-centric 
rehabilitation protocols and individualized exercise pro-
grams for patients with aortic disease is an unmet need 
that requires further study.1-4
12.8. Equitable Care and Training Opportunities
Sociodemographic disparities can pose challenges to 
patients and clinicians who seek and offer cardiovascular 
and aortic care. Market competition, a relatively modern 
phenomenon, and physician market concentration can 
drive decision-making and subsequently affect optimal 
care. Providing optimal cardiovascular and aortic care 
will depend on widespread regional quality improvement 
projects to determine best practices, minimize varia-
tions in areas where evidence-based medicine has finite 
benchmarks, and standardize patient selection and case 
management. Physician participation in these programs 
should be encouraged, and educational interventions 
and training should be provided to disseminate knowl-
edge and improve performance, which will help increase 
awareness for patients and physicians in less-populated, 
underserved areas.1-3
PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE MEMBERS
David P. Faxon, MD, FACC, Chair; Gilbert R. Upchurch Jr, 
MD, FAHA, FACC, Vice Chair; Aaron W. Aday, MD, MSc, 
FAHA; Ali Azizzadeh, MD; Michael Boisen, MD*; Beau 
Hawkins, MD, FACC†; Christopher M. Kramer, MD, FACC, 
FAHA; Jessica G.Y. Luc, MD; Thomas E. MacGillivray, 
MD‡; S. Christopher Malaisrie, MD, FACC§; Kathryn 
Osteen, PhD, RN, CMSRN, CNE; Himanshu J. Patel, MD, 
FACC, FAHA; Parag J. Patel, MD||; Wanda M. Popescu, 
MD; Evelio Rodriguez, MD, FACC; Rebecca Sorber, MD; 
Philip S. Tsao, PhD; Annabelle Santos Volgman, MD, 
FACC, FAHA
*SCA representative. †SCAI representative. ‡AHA/ACC Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines liaison. §AATS representative. ||SIR representative.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e445
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
AHA/ACC JOINT COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair; Cath-
erine M. Otto, MD, FAHA, FACC, Chair-Elect; Patrick 
T. O’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Immediate Past Chair¶; 
Anastasia Armbruster, PharmD, FACC; Kim K. Birtcher, 
PharmD, MS, FACC¶; Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, 
FAHA; Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA; Dave L. 
Dixon, PharmD, FACC, FAHA¶; Bulent Gorenek, MD, 
FACC; Norrisa Haynes, MD, MPH; Adrian F. Hernandez, 
MD, MHS, FAHA; José A. Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA¶; 
W. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC; Daniel Mark, MD, MPH, 
FACC, FAHA¶; Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA, 
FSCAI; Latha Palaniappan, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA; Mari-
ann R. Piano, RN, PhD, FAHA; Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC; 
Erica S. Spatz, MD, MS, FACC; Jacqueline E. Tamis-
Holland, MD, FAHA, FACC, FSCAI; Y. Joseph Woo, MD, 
FACC, FAHA
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Edward T.A. Fry, MD, FACC, President
Cathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Officer
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical Adviser
MaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Director, Enterprise Con-
tent and Digital Strategy
Grace D. Ronan, Team Leader, Clinical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content 
Development
American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association
Thomas S.D. Getchius, Director, Guideline Strategy and 
Operations
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and 
Methodology
American Heart Association
Donald M. Lloyd-Jones, MD, ScM, FAHA, President
Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Officer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical 
Officer
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President, 
Office of Science and Medicine
Johanna A. Sharp‚ MSN‚ RN‚ Science and Medicine 
Advisor, Office of Science‚ Medicine and Health
Jody Hundley, Production and Operations Manager, Sci-
entific Publications, Office of Science Operations
ARTICLE INFORMATION
This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Pol-
icy Approval Committee and the American Heart Association Science Advisory 
and Coordinating Committee in July 2022, the American College of Cardiology 
Science and Quality Committee in August 2022, and the American Heart As-
sociation Executive Committee in September 2022.
This article has been copublished in the Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology.
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American College of 
Cardiology (www.acc.org) and the American Heart Association (professional.heart.
org). A copy of the document is also available at https://professional.heart.org/
statements by selecting the “Guidelines & Statements” button. To purchase addi-
tional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email Meredith.Edelman@wolterskluwer.com.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the 
AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guide-
lines & Statements” drop-down menu near the top of the webpage, then click 
“Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and dis-
tribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission of the 
American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at 
https://www.heart.org/permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request 
Form” appears in the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/about-us/
statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form).
REFERENCES 
PREAMBLE
 1. Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice 
Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (US). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can 
Trust. National Academies Press; 2011.
 2. Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effective-
ness Research, Institute of Medicine (US). Finding What Works in Health 
Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews. National Academies Press; 2011.
 3. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 4. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual and 
Policies from the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American 
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association. 2010. Accessed 
September 23, 2019. https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-
and-Clinical-Documents/Methodology and https://professional.heart.org/-/
media/phd-files/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_
policies_ucm_319826.pdf
 5. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/
AHA clinical practice guideline recommendation classification system: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 6. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to 
enhance application of clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardio-
vascular disease and comorbid conditions: from the American Heart As-
sociation, American College of Cardiology, and U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. Circulation. 2014;130:1662–1667 . 
 7 . Levine GN, O’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent innovations, modifications, 
and evolution of ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines: an update for our 
constituencies: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2019;139:e879–e886. 
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
 1. Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GA, Azizzdeh A, et al. Society for Vascular Sur-
gery clinical practice guidelines of thoracic endovascular aortic repair for 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:55S–83S.
 2. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 . 
¶Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guideline member, current 
member during the writing effort.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e446
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 3. Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, et al. 2018 update of the EULAR recom-
mendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2020;79:19–30.
 4. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143. 
 5. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for 
the management of adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e698–e800. 
 6. Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The Society for Vascular Sur-
gery practice guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:2–77 .e72.
 7 . Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:1269–1324.
 8. Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al. 2016 AHA/ACC guide-
line on the management of patients with lower extremity peripheral ar-
tery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2017;135:e686–e725. 
 9. Riambau V, Bockler D, Brunkwall J, et al. Editor’s choice - management of de-
scending thoracic aorta diseases: clinical practice guidelines of the European 
Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2017;53:4–52.
 10. Hiratzka LF, Creager MA, Isselbacher EM, et al. Surgery for aortic dilatation 
in patients with bicuspid aortic valves: a statement of clarification from the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151:959–
966.
 11. Wilson WR, Bower TC, Creager MA, et al. Vascular graft infections, mycotic 
aneurysms, and endovascular infections: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e412–e460.
 12. Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular repair of traumatic 
thoracic aortic injury: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular 
Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:187–192.
 13. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and man-
agement of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of 
Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–
e369.
 14. Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary 
prevention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular dis-
ease: 2006 update. Circulation. 2006;113:2363–2372.
 15. Malaisrie SC, Szeto WY, Halas M, et al. 2021 The American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery expert consensus document: surgical treatment of acute 
type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;162:735–758.e2.
 16. MacGillivray TE, Gleason TG, Patel HJ, et al. The Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons/American Association for Thoracic Surgery clinical practice guide-
lines on the management of type B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2022;113:1073–1092.
2.2. Aortic Landing Zones
 1. Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options and recommendations 
for the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: 
an expert consensus document of the European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the European Society for Vascular Surgery 
(ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;55:133–162.
 2. Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Johnston DR, et al. Zone zero thoracic endovascular 
aortic repair: a proposed modification to the classification of landing zones. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;155:1381–1389.
 3. Johnston KW, Rutherford RB, Tilson MD, et al. Suggested standards for 
reporting on arterial aneurysms. Subcommittee on Reporting Standards for 
Arterial Aneurysms, Ad Hoc Committee on Reporting Standards, Society 
for Vascular Surgery and North American Chapter, International Society for 
Cardiovascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 1991;13:452–458.
 4. Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the ascending aorta be re-
placed more frequently in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128:677–683.
 5. Paruchuri V, Salhab KF, Kuzmik G, et al. Aortic size distribution in the gen-
eral population: explaining the size paradox in aortic dissection. Cardiology. 
2015;131:265–272.
 6. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno -
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 7 . Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms. Circulation. 
2005;111:816–828.
 8. Kruger T, Sandoval Boburg R, Lescan M, et al. Aortic elongation in aortic an-
eurysm and dissection: the Tubingen Aortic Pathoanatomy (TAIPAN) project. 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;54:26–33.
 9. Kawsara A, Nunez Gil IJ, Alqahtani F, et al. Management of coronary artery 
aneurysms. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2018;11:1211–1223.
 10. van Kimmenade RR, Kempers M, de Boer MJ, et al. A clinical appraisal 
of different Z-score equations for aortic root assessment in the diagnostic 
evaluation of Marfan syndrome. Genet Med. 2013;15:528–532.
 11. Davies RR, Gallo A, Coady MA, et al. Novel measurement of relative aor-
tic size predicts rupture of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2006;81:169–177 .
 12. Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather than body surface area, 
suffices for risk estimation in ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1938–1950.
 13. Svensson LG, Khitin L. Aortic cross-sectional area/height ratio timing of 
aortic surgery in asymptomatic patients with Marfan syndrome. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123:360–361.
 14. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with a trileaflet aortic valve and a dilated 
aorta. Circulation. 2016;134:1724–1737 .
 15. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
2.4. Definitions and Classification of Acute Aortic Syndrome 
(AAS)
 1. Clough RE, Nienaber CA. Management of acute aortic syndrome. Nat Rev 
Cardiol. 2015;12:103–114.
 2. Booher AM, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. The IRAD classifica-
tion system for characterizing survival after aortic dissection. Am J Med. 
2013;126:730.e719–730.e724.
 3. Tsai TT, Nienaber CA, Eagle KA. Acute aortic syndromes. Circulation. 
2005;112:3802–3813.
 4. Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options and recommendations 
for the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: 
an expert consensus document of the European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the European Society for Vascular Surgery 
(ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;55:133–162.
 5. Lombardi JV, Hughes GC, Appoo JJ, et al. Society for Vascular Surgery 
(SVS) and Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) reporting standards for type 
B aortic dissections. J Vasc Surg. 2020;71:723–747 .
 6. Grewal S, Contrella BN, Sherk WM, et al. Endovascular Management of 
Malperfusion Syndromes in Aortic Dissection. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 
2021;24:100751.
 7 . Mussa FF, Horton JD, Moridzadeh R, et al. Acute aortic dissection and intra-
mural hematoma: a systematic review. JAMA. 2016;316:754–763.
 8. Oderich GS, Karkkainen JM, Reed NR, et al. Penetrating aortic ulcer and 
intramural hematoma. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2019;42:321–334.
 9. Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute aortic intramural hema-
toma: an analysis from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. 
Circulation. 2012;126:S91–S96.
 10. Bossone E, LaBounty TM, Eagle KA. Acute aortic syndromes: diagnosis and 
management, an update. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:739d–749d.
 11. Song JK, Kim HS, Kang DH, et al. Different clinical features of aortic intra-
mural hematoma versus dissection involving the ascending aorta. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2001;37:1604–1610.
 12. Brown JA, Arnaoutakis GJ, Kilic A, et al. Current trends in the management 
of acute type A aortic intramural hematoma. J Card Surg. 2020;35:2331–
2337 .
 13. Bischoff MS, Geisbusch P, Peters AS, et al. Penetrating aortic ulcer: defining 
risks and therapeutic strategies. Herz. 2011;36:498–504.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e447
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
2.5. Classification of Thoracoabdominal Aortic Aneurysm 
(TAAA)
 1. Safi HJ, Winnerkvist A, Miller CC 3rd, et al. Effect of extended cross-clamp 
time during thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1998;66:1204–1209.
 2. Riambau V, Bockler D, Brunkwall J, et al. Editor’s choice - management 
of descending thoracic aorta diseases: clinical practice guidelines of the 
European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2017;53:4–52.
 3. Conrad MF, Cambria RP. Contemporary management of descending tho-
racic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: endovascular versus open. 
Circulation. 2008;117:841–852.
3.1. Aortic Imaging Techniques to Determine Presence and 
Progression of Aortic Disease
 1. Sternbergh WC 3rd, Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, et al. Redefining postop-
erative surveillance after endovascular aneurysm repair: recommendations 
based on 5-year follow-up in the US Zenith multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:278–284; discussion 84–85.
 2. Rokosh RS, Wu WW, Schermerhorn M, et al. Society for Vascular Surgery 
implementation of clinical practice guidelines for patients with an abdominal 
aortic aneurysm: Postoperative surveillance after abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2021;74:1438–1439.
 3. Mendoza DD, Kochar M, Devereux RB, et al. Impact of image analysis meth-
odology on diagnostic and surgical classification of patients with thoracic 
aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;92:904–912.
 4. Rudarakanchana N, Bicknell CD, Cheshire NJ, et al. Variation in maximum 
diameter measurements of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms using un-
formatted planes versus images corrected to aortic centerline. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2014;47:19–26.
 5. Amis ES Jr, Butler PF, American College of Radiology. ACR white paper on 
radiation dose in medicine: three years later. J Am Coll Radiol. 2010;7:865–
870.
 6. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography--an increasing source of radia-
tion exposure. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2277–2284.
 7 . Costello JE, Cecava ND, Tucker JE, et al. CT radiation dose: current 
controversies and dose reduction strategies. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
2013;201:1283–1290.
 8. Svensson LG, Kim KH, Lytle BW, et al. Relationship of aortic cross-sectional 
area to height ratio and the risk of aortic dissection in patients with bicuspid 
aortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126:892–893.
 9. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with a trileaflet aortic valve and a dilated 
aorta. Circulation. 2016;134:1724–1737 .
 10. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 11. Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather than body surface area, 
suffices for risk estimation in ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1938–1950.
 12. Beebe HG, Kritpracha B, Serres S, et al. Endograft planning without 
preoperative arteriography: a clinical feasibility study. J Endovasc Ther. 
2000;7:8–15.
 13. Vriz O, Driussi C, Bettio M, et al. Aortic root dimensions and stiffness in 
healthy subjects. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1224–1229.
 14 . Rodriguez-Palomares JF, Teixido-Tura G, Galuppo V, et al. Multimodality 
Assessment of Ascending Aortic Diameters: Comparison of Different Mea-
surement Methods. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2016;29:819–826.e814.
 15. Asch FM, Yuriditsky E, Prakash SK, et al. The need for standardized meth-
ods for measuring the aorta: multimodality core lab experience from the 
GenTAC Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2016;9:219–226.
 16. Potthast S, Mitsumori L, Stanescu LA, et al. Measuring aortic diameter with 
different MR techniques: comparison of three-dimensional (3D) navigated 
steady-state free-precession (SSFP), 3D contrast-enhanced magnetic res-
onance angiography (CE-MRA), 2D T2 black blood, and 2D cine SSFP. J 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2010;31:177–184.
 17 . Plonek T, Berezowski M, Bochenek M, et al. A comparison of aortic root 
measurements by echocardiography and computed tomography. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:479–486.
 18. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, et al. Echocardiographic reference 
values for aortic root size: the Framingham Heart Study. J Am Soc Echocar-
diogr. 1995;8:793–800.
 19. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Levy D. Determinants of echocardiographic aortic 
root size. The Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 1995;91:734–740.
 20. Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al. Normal limits in relation to age, 
body size and gender of two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root di-
mensions in persons ≥15 years of age. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1189–1194.
 21. Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery consensus guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aor-
topathy: full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:e41–
e74.
3.2. Conventions of Measurements
 1. Lombardi JV, Hughes GC, Appoo JJ, et al. Society for Vascular Surgery 
(SVS) and Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) reporting standards for type 
B aortic dissections. J Vasc Surg. 2020;71:723–747 .
 2. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Levy D. Determinants of echocardiographic aortic 
root size. The Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 1995;91:734–740.
 3. Vasan RS, Larson MG, Benjamin EJ, et al. Echocardiographic reference 
values for aortic root size: the Framingham Heart Study. J Am Soc Echocar-
diogr. 1995;8:793–800.
 4. Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al. Normal limits in relation to 
age, body size and gender of two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root 
dimensions in persons ≥15 years of age. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1189–
1194.
 5. Vriz O, Driussi C, Bettio M, et al. Aortic root dimensions and stiffness in 
healthy subjects. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1224–1229.
 6. Rodriguez-Palomares JF, Teixido-Tura G, Galuppo V, et al. Multimodality As-
sessment of Ascending Aortic Diameters: Comparison of Different Mea-
surement Methods. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2016;29:819–826.e814.
 7 . Weinrich JM, Avanesov M, Lenz A, et al. Reliability of non-contrast mag-
netic resonance angiography-derived aortic diameters in Marfan patients: 
comparison of inner vs. outer vessel wall measurements. Int J Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2020;36:1533–1542.
 8. Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Y early rupture or dissection rates 
for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2002;73:17–27; discussion 27–28.
 9. Kim EK, Choi SH, Sung K, et al. Aortic diameter predicts acute type A aor-
tic dissection in patients with Marfan syndrome but not in patients without 
Marfan syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147:1505–1510.
 10. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with a trileaflet aortic valve and a dilated 
aorta. Circulation. 2016;134:1724–1737 .
 11. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 12. Bons LR, Rueda-Ochoa OL, El Ghoul K, et al. Sex-specific distribu-
tions and determinants of thoracic aortic diameters in the elderly. Heart. 
2020;106:133–139.
 13. Wu J, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Ascending aortic length and risk of aortic adverse 
events: the neglected dimension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1883–1894.
 14. Renapurkar RD, Setser RM, O’Donnell TP, et al. Aortic volume as an indica-
tor of disease progression in patients with untreated infrarenal abdominal 
aneurysm. Eur J Radiol. 2012;81:e87–e93.
 15. den Hartog AW, Franken R, de Witte P, et al. Aortic disease in patients with 
Marfan syndrome: aortic volume assessment for surveillance. Radiology. 
2013;269:370–377 .
3.2.1. Computed Tomography
 1. Lu TL, Huber CH, Rizzo E, et al. Ascending aorta measurements as as-
sessed by ECG-gated multi-detector computed tomography: a pilot study 
to establish normative values for transcatheter therapies. Eur Radiol. 
2009;19:664–669.
 2. Davenport MS, Perazella MA, Y ee J, et al. Use of Intravenous Iodinated Con-
trast Media in Patients With Kidney Disease: Consensus Statements from 
the American College of Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation. 
Kidney Med. 2020;2:85–93.
 3. Yoshida S, Akiba H, Tamakawa M, et al. Thoracic involvement of type A aor-
tic dissection and intramural hematoma: diagnostic accuracy--comparison 
of emergency helical CT and surgical findings. Radiology. 2003;228:430–
435.
 4. Imoto K, Uchida K, Karube N, et al. Risk analysis and improvement of strat-
egies in patients who have acute type A aortic dissection with coronary 
artery dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44:419–424; discussion 
424–425.
 5. Thoongsuwan N, Stern EJ. Chest CT scanning for clinical suspected 
thoracic aortic dissection: beware the alternate diagnosis. Emerg Radiol. 
2002;9:257–261.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e448
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
3.2.2. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
 1. Barra L, Kanji T, Malette J, et al. Imaging modalities for the diagnosis and 
disease activity assessment of Takayasu’s arteritis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Autoimmun Rev. 2018;17:175–187 .
 2. Potthast S, Mitsumori L, Stanescu LA, et al. Measuring aortic diameter with 
different MR techniques: comparison of three-dimensional (3D) navigated 
steady-state free-precession (SSFP), 3D contrast-enhanced magnetic res-
onance angiography (CE-MRA), 2D T2 black blood, and 2D cine SSFP. J 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2010;31:177–184.
 3. Krishnam MS, Tomasian A, Malik S, et al. Image quality and diagnostic ac-
curacy of unenhanced SSFP MR angiography compared with conventional 
contrast-enhanced MR angiography for the assessment of thoracic aortic 
diseases. Eur Radiol. 2010;20:1311–1320.
 4. Moore AG, Eagle KA, Bruckman D, et al. Choice of computed tomography, 
transesophageal echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging, and aor-
tography in acute aortic dissection: International Registry of Acute Aortic 
Dissection (IRAD). Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:1235–1238.
 5. Lunyera J, Mohottige D, Alexopoulos AS, et al. Risk for nephrogenic system-
ic fibrosis after exposure to newer gadolinium agents: a systematic review. 
Ann Intern Med. 2020;173:110–119.
 6. Weinreb JC, Rodby RA, Y ee J, et al. Use of intravenous gadolinium-based 
contrast media in patients with kidney disease: consensus statements from 
the American College of Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation. 
Radiology. 2021;298:28–35.
3.2.3. Echocardiography
 1. Evangelista A, Flachskampf FA, Erbel R, et al. Echocardiography in aortic 
diseases: EAE recommendations for clinical practice. Eur J Echocardiogr. 
2010;11:645–658.
 2. Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Multimodality imaging of dis-
eases of the thoracic aorta in adults: from the American Society of Echocar-
diography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:119–182.
3.2.4. Intravascular Ultrasound
 1. Kpodonu J, Ramaiah VG, Diethrich EB. Intravascular ultrasound imaging as 
applied to the aorta: a new tool for the cardiovascular surgeon. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2008;86:1391–1398.
 2. Martin ZL, Mastracci TM. The evaluation of aortic dissections with intravas-
cular ultrasonography. Vasc Dis Manag. 2011;8:E93–E97 .
 3. Lortz J, Tsagakis K, Rammos C, et al. Intravascular ultrasound assisted sizing 
in thoracic endovascular aortic repair improves aortic remodeling in type B 
aortic dissection. PLoS One. 2018;13:e0196180.
 4. Lortz J, Papathanasiou M, Rammos C, et al. High intimal flap mobility 
assessed by intravascular ultrasound is associated with better short-term 
results after TEVAR in chronic aortic dissection. Sci Rep. 2019;9:7267 .
 5. Illuminati G, Pacile MA, Ceccanei G, et al. Peroperative intravascular ul-
trasound for endovascular aneurysm repair versus peroperative angiog-
raphy: a pilot study in fit patients with favorable anatomy. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2020;64:54–61.
3.2.5. Abdominal Ultrasound
 1. Harter LP, Gross BH, Callen PW, et al. Ultrasonic evaluation of abdominal 
aortic thrombus. J Ultrasound Med. 1982;1:315–318.
 2. Steiner E, Rubens D, Weiss SL, et al. Sonographic examination of the ab-
dominal aorta through the left flank: a prospective study. J Ultrasound Med. 
1986;5:499–502.
 3. Owens DK, Davidson KW, Krist AH, et al. Screening for abdominal aortic 
aneurysm: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. 
JAMA. 2019;322:2211–2218.
 4. Ellis M, Powell JT, Greenhalgh RM. Limitations of ultrasonography in surveil-
lance of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg. 1991;78:614–616.
 5. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 guidelines for 
the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extrem-
ity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a collaborative report from the 
American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vas-
cular Medicine and Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the 
ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to De-
velop Guidelines for the Management of Patients with Peripheral Arterial 
Disease). Circulation. 2006;113:e463–e654.
 6. The UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants. Mortality results for randomised 
controlled trial of early elective surgery or ultrasonographic surveillance for 
small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Lancet. 1998;352:1649–1655.
 7 . Wilmink AB, Forshaw M, Quick CR, et al. Accuracy of serial screening for 
abdominal aortic aneurysms by ultrasound. J Med Screen. 2002;9:125–127 .
 8. Long A, Rouet L, Lindholt JS, et al. Measuring the maximum diameter of 
native abdominal aortic aneurysms: review and critical analysis. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2012;43:515–524.
 9. Abraha I, Luchetta ML, De Florio R, et al. Ultrasonography for endoleak 
detection after endoluminal abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2017;(6):CD010296.
4. Multidisciplinary Aortic Teams
 1. Andersen ND, Ganapathi AM, Hanna JM, et al. Outcomes of acute type 
A dissection repair before and after implementation of a multidisciplinary 
thoracic aortic surgery program. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1796–1803.
 2. Bottle A, Mariscalco G, Shaw MA, et al. Unwarranted variation in the quality 
of care for patients with diseases of the thoracic aorta. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2017;6:e004913.
 3. Landon BE, O’Malley AJ, Giles K, et al. Volume-outcome relationships and 
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Circulation. 2010;122:1290–1297 .
 4. Hughes GC, Zhao Y, Rankin JS, et al. Effects of institutional volumes on 
operative outcomes for aortic root replacement in North America. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:166–170.
 5. Khan H, Hussain A, Chaubey S, et al. Acute aortic dissection type A: im-
pact of aortic specialists on short and long term outcomes. J Card Surg. 
2021;36:952–958.
 6. Preventza O. In type A aortic dissection repair, an effective team approach 
and relational coordination are more important for patients’ outcomes than 
surgeon volume. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;154:407–408.
 7 . Elrod JK, Fortenberry JL Jr. Centers of excellence in healthcare institu-
tions: what they are and how to assemble them. BMC Health Serv Res. 
2017;17:425.
 8. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 .
 9. Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk profiles and volume-
outcome relationships in proximal thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;106:1095–1104.
 10. Umana-Pizano JB, Nissen AP, Sandhu HK, et al. Acute type A dissection re-
pair by high-volume vs low-volume surgeons at a high-volume aortic center. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;108:1330–1336.
5. Shared Decision-Making
 1. Ubbink DT, Knops AM, Molenaar S, et al. Design and development of a 
decision aid to enhance shared decision making by patients with an asymp-
tomatic abdominal aortic aneurysm. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2008;2:315–
322.
 2. Hess EP, Coylewright M, Frosch DL, et al. Implementation of shared deci-
sion making in cardiovascular care: past, present, and future. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:797–803.
 3. Lin GA, Fagerlin A. Shared decision making: state of the science. Circ Car-
diovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:328–334.
 4. Treasure T, King A, Hidalgo Lemp L, et al. Developing a shared decision 
support framework for aortic root surgery in Marfan syndrome. Heart. 
2018;104:480–486.
 5. Gokalp AL, Takkenberg JJM. Decision-making in thoracic aortic aneu-
rysm surgery-clinician and patient view. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2019;31:638–642.
 6. Swart M, McCarthy R. Shared decision making for elective abdominal aortic 
aneurysm surgery. Clin Med (Lond). 2019;19:473–477 .
 7. Alston CZ, Berger S, Brownlee G, et al. Shared decision-making strategies 
for best care: patient decision aids NAM Perspectives. Discussion paper. 
National Academy of Medicine; 2014. https://doi.org/10.31478/201409f
6.1. Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) Cause
 1. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/
ACR/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Associa-
tion Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, 
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Soci-
ety of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 
2010;121:e266–e369.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e449
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 2. Biaggi P, Matthews F, Braun J, et al. Gender, age, and body surface area are 
the major determinants of ascending aorta dimensions in subjects with ap-
parently normal echocardiograms. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009;22:720–
725.
 3. Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather than body surface area, 
suffices for risk estimation in ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1938–1950.
 4. Obel LM, Diederichsen AC, Steffensen FH, et al. Population-based risk 
factors for ascending, arch, descending, and abdominal aortic dilations for 
60–74-year-old individuals. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:201–211.
 5. Rouchaud A, Brandt MD, Rydberg AM, et al. Prevalence of intracranial 
aneurysms in patients with aortic aneurysms. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2016;37:1664–1668.
 6. Vapnik JS, Kim JB, Isselbacher EM, et al. Characteristics and outcomes 
of ascending versus descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Am J Cardiol. 
2016;117:1683–1690.
 7 . Pinard A, Jones GT, Milewicz DM. Genetics of thoracic and abdominal aortic 
diseases. Circ Res. 2019;124:588–606.
 8. Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: genetic testing in the diagno-
sis and management of patients with aortic disease. Heart. 2021;107:619–
626.
 9. Raunso J, Song RJ, Vasan RS, et al. Familial clustering of aortic size, an-
eurysms, and dissections in the community. Circulation. 2020;142:920–
928.
 10. Verhagen JMA, Kempers M, Cozijnsen L, et al. Expert consensus rec-
ommendations on the cardiogenetic care for patients with thoracic 
aortic disease and their first-degree relatives. Int J Cardiol. 2018;258: 
243–248.
 11. Milewicz DM, Ostergaard JR, la-Kokko LM, et al. De novo ACTA2 mutation 
causes a novel syndrome of multisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction. Am 
J Med Genet A. 2010;152A:2437–2443.
6.1.1. Sporadic and Degenerative TAA
 1. Vapnik JS, Kim JB, Isselbacher EM, et al. Characteristics and outcomes 
of ascending versus descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Am J Cardiol. 
2016;117:1683–1690.
 2. Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GC, Azizzdeh A, et al. Society for Vascular Surgery 
clinical practice guidelines for thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (Te-
var). J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:55S–83S.
6.1.2.1. HTAD: Genetic Testing and Screening of Family 
Members for TAD
 1. Biddinger A, Rocklin M, Coselli J, et al. Familial thoracic aortic dilatations 
and dissections: a case control study. J Vasc Surg. 1997;25:506–511.
 2. Coady MA, Davies RR, Roberts M, et al. Familial patterns of thoracic aortic 
aneurysms. Arch Surg. 1999;134:361–367 .
 3. Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms 
and dissections-incidence, modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1400–1405.
 4. Renard M, Francis C, Ghosh R, et al. Clinical validity of genes for heritable 
thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:605–
615.
 5. Wolford BN, Hornsby WE, Guo D, et al. Clinical implications of identifying 
pathogenic variants in individuals with thoracic aortic dissection. Circ Genom 
Precis Med. 2019;12:e002476.
 6. Milewicz DM, Guo D, Hostetler E, et al. Update on the genetic risk for tho-
racic aortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissections: implications for clinical 
care. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2021;62:203–210.
 7 . Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK pathogenic variants aortic 
disease presentation, pregnancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic 
missense variants. Genet Med. 2019;21:144–151.
 8. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic disease presentation 
and outcome associated with ACTA2 mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2015;8:457–464.
 9. Guo DC, Regalado E, Casteel DE, et al. Recurrent gain-of-function mutation 
in PRKG1 causes thoracic aortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissections. 
Am J Hum Genet. 2013;93:398–404.
 10. Harris SL, Lindsay ME. Role of clinical genetic testing in the management 
of aortopathies. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2021;23:10.
 11. Demo E, Rigelsky C, Rideout AL, et al. Genetics and precision medicine: 
heritable thoracic aortic disease. Med Clin North Am. 2019;103:1005–
1019.
 12. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Villamizar C, et al. Exome sequencing identi-
fies SMAD3 mutations as a cause of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm 
and dissection with intracranial and other arterial aneurysms. Circ Res. 
2011;109:680–686.
 13. Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al. Familial non-syndromal 
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections-incidence and family screening 
outcomes. Int J Cardiol. 2016;220:43–51.
 14. Hannuksela M, Stattin EL, Johansson B, et al. Screening for familial thoracic 
aortic aneurysms with aortic imaging does not detect all potential carriers of 
the disease. Aorta (Stamford). 2015;3:1–8.
 15. Mariscalco G, Debiec R, Elefteriades JA, et al. Systematic review of stud-
ies that have evaluated screening tests in relatives of patients affected 
by nonsyndromic thoracic aortic disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7: 
e009302.
 16. Guo DC, Pannu H, Papke CL, et al. Mutations in smooth muscle alpha-
actin (ACTA2) lead to thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections. Nat Genet. 
2007;39:1488–1493.
 17 . Rylski B, Blanke P, Beyersdorf F, et al. How does the ascending aorta geom-
etry change when it dissects? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1311–1319.
 18. Milewicz DM, Chen H, Park ES, et al. Reduced penetrance and variable 
expressivity of familial thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections. Am J Cardiol. 
1998;82:474–479.
 19. Renard M, Francis C, Ghosh R, et al. Clinical validity of genes for heritable 
thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:605–
615.
 20. Guo DC, Hostetler EM, Fan Y, et al. Heritable thoracic aortic disease genes 
in sporadic aortic dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:2728–2730.
 21. Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause familial thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections associated with mild systemic features of 
Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012;44:916–921.
 22. Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of multigenerational families 
with thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 
mutations. J Med Genet. 2009;46:607–613.
 23. Villamizar C, Regalado ES, Fadulu VT, et al. Paucity of skeletal mani -
festations in hispanic families with FBN1 mutations. Eur J Med Genet. 
2010;53:80–84.
 24. Morisaki H, Akutsu K, Ogino H, et al. Mutation of ACTA2 gene as an impor-
tant cause of familial and nonfamilial nonsyndromatic thoracic aortic aneu-
rysm and/or dissection (TAAD). Hum Mutat. 2009;30:1406–1411.
 25. Guo DC, Papke CL, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations in smooth muscle alpha-
actin (ACTA2) cause coronary artery disease, stroke, and moyamoya dis-
ease, along with thoracic aortic disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2009;84:617–
627 .
 26. Loscalzo ML, Goh DL, Loeys B, et al. Familial thoracic aortic dilation and 
bicommissural aortic valve: a prospective analysis of natural history and in-
heritance. Am J Med Genet A. 2007;143:1960–1967 .
 27 . Zhu L, Vranckx R, Khau Van KP, et al. Mutations in myosin heavy chain 11 
cause a syndrome associating thoracic aortic aneurysm/aortic dissection 
and patent ductus arteriosus. Nat Genet. 2006;38:343–349.
6.1.2.1.1. Surgical Considerations for Nonsyndromic Heritable 
TAAs and No Identified Genetic Cause
 1. Weinsaft JW, Devereux RB, Preiss LR, et al. Aortic Dissection in Patients 
With Genetically Mediated Aneurysms: Incidence and Predictors in the Gen-
TAC Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2744–2754.
 2. Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms 
and dissections--incidence, modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1400–1405.
 3. Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al. Familial non-syndromal 
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections - Incidence and family screening 
outcomes. Int J Cardiol. 2016;220:43–51.
 4. Brownstein AJ, Kostiuk V, Ziganshin BA, et al. Genes associated with tho-
racic aortic aneurysm and dissection: 2018 update and clinical implications. 
Aorta (Stamford). 2018;6:13–20.
 5. Robertson EN, van der Linde D, Sherrah AG, et al. Familial non-syndromal 
thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections-incidence and family screening 
outcomes. Int J Cardiol. 2016;220:43–51.
 6. Weinsaft JW, Devereux RB, Preiss LR, et al. Aortic dissection in patients 
with genetically mediated aneurysms: incidence and predictors in the Gen-
TAC registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2744–2754.
 7 . Albornoz G, Coady MA, Roberts M, et al. Familial thoracic aortic aneurysms 
and dissections-incidence, modes of inheritance, and phenotypic patterns. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1400–1405.
 8. Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Decision-making algorithm for ascending 
aortic aneurysm: effectiveness in clinical application? J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2019;157:1733–1745.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e450
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
6.1.2.2.1. Diagnostic and Surveillance Aortic Imaging in Marfan 
Syndrome
 1. Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for 
the Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.
 2. Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Multimodality imaging of dis-
eases of the thoracic aorta in adults: from the American Society of Echocar-
diography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:119–182.
 3. Finkbohner R, Johnston D, Crawford ES, et al. Marfan syndrome. Long-
term survival and complications after aortic aneurysm repair. Circulation. 
1995;91:728–733.
 4. den Hartog AW, Franken R, Zwinderman AH, et al. The risk for type B aortic 
dissection in Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:246–254.
 5. Girdauskas E, Kuntze T, Borger MA, et al. Distal aortic reinterventions after 
root surgery in Marfan patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:1815–1819.
 6. LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum of aortic operations in 
300 patients with confirmed or suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2006;81:2063–2078; discussion 2078.
 7 . Hagerty T, Geraghty P, Braverman AC. Abdominal aortic aneurysm in Marfan 
syndrome. Ann Vasc Surg. 2017;40:294.e1–294.6.
 8. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 9. Gott VL, Greene PS, Alejo DE, et al. Replacement of the aortic root in pa-
tients with Marfan’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1307–1313.
 10. Silverman DI, Burton KJ, Gray J, et al. Life expectancy in the Marfan syn-
drome. Am J Cardiol. 1995;75:157–160.
 11. Roman MJ, Rosen SE, Kramer-Fox R, et al. Prognostic significance of the 
pattern of aortic root dilation in the Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1993;22:1470–1476.
 12. Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al. Normal limits in relation to 
age, body size and gender of two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root 
dimensions in persons ≥15 years of age. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1189–
1194.
 13. LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum of aortic operations in 
300 patients with confirmed or suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2006;81:2063–2078; discussion 2078.
6.1.2.2.2. Medical Therapy in Marfan Syndrome
 1. Forteza A, Evangelista A, Sanchez V, et al. Efficacy of losartan vs. atenolol for 
the prevention of aortic dilation in Marfan syndrome: a randomized clinical 
trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:978–985.
 2. Lacro RV, Dietz HC, Sleeper LA, et al. Atenolol versus losartan in children 
and young adults with Marfan’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:2061–
2071.
 3. Groenink M, den Hartog AW, Franken R, et al. Losartan reduces aortic dila-
tation rate in adults with Marfan syndrome: a randomized controlled trial. Eur 
Heart J. 2013;34:3491–3500.
 4. Mullen M, Jin XY, Child A, et al. Irbesartan in Marfan syndrome (AIMS): a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled randomised trial. Lancet. 2019;394:2263–
2270.
 5. Shores J, Berger KR, Murphy EA, et al. Progression of aortic dilatation and 
the benefit of long-term beta-adrenergic blockade in Marfan’s syndrome. N 
Engl J Med. 1994;330:1335–1341.
 6. Ladouceur M, Fermanian C, Lupoglazoff JM, et al. Effect of beta-blockade 
on ascending aortic dilatation in children with the Marfan syndrome. Am J 
Cardiol. 2007;99:406–409.
 7 . Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 8. Milleron O, Arnoult F, Ropers J, et al. Marfan Sartan: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:2160–2166.
 9. Habashi JP, Judge DP, Holm TM, et al. Losartan, an AT1 antagonist, pre-
vents aortic aneurysm in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome. Science. 
2006;312:117–121.
 10. Brooke BS, Habashi JP, Judge DP, et al. Angiotensin II blockade and aortic-
root dilation in Marfan’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2787–2795.
 11. Al-Abcha A, Saleh Y, Mujer M, et al. Meta-analysis examining the usefulness 
of angiotensin receptor blockers for the prevention of aortic root dilation in 
patients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2020;128:101–106.
6.1.2.2.3. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: Replacement of the 
Aortic Root in Patients With Marfan Syndrome
 1. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 2. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 3. Milleron O, Arnoult F, Delorme G, et al. Pathogenic FBN1 genetic variation 
and aortic dissection in patients with Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;75:843–853.
 4. Martin C, Evangelista A, Serrano-Fiz S, et al. Aortic complications in Marfan 
syndrome: should we anticipate preventive aortic root surgery? Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2020;109:1850–1857 .
 5. Svensson LG, Khitin L. Aortic cross-sectional area/height ratio timing of 
aortic surgery in asymptomatic patients with Marfan syndrome. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;123:360–361.
 6. Silverman DI, Gray J, Roman MJ, et al. Family history of severe cardiovascu-
lar disease in Marfan syndrome is associated with increased aortic diameter 
and decreased survival. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;26:1062–1067 .
 7 . Finkbohner R, Johnston D, Crawford ES, et al. Marfan syndrome. Long-
term survival and complications after aortic aneurysm repair. Circulation. 
1995;91:728–733.
 8. Gott VL, Greene PS, Alejo DE, et al. Replacement of the aortic root in pa-
tients with Marfan’s syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1999;340:1307–1313.
 9. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 10. Silverman DI, Burton KJ, Gray J, et al. Life expectancy in the Marfan syn-
drome. Am J Cardiol. 1995;75:157–160.
 11. Jondeau G, Detaint D, Tubach F, et al. Aortic event rate in the Marfan popu-
lation: a cohort study. Circulation. 2012;125:226–232.
 12. Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural history of aortic root 
aneurysms in Marfan syndrome. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;6:625–632.
 13. Coselli JS, Volguina IV, LeMaire SA, et al. Early and 1-year outcomes of aor-
tic root surgery in patients with Marfan syndrome: a prospective, multicenter, 
comparative study. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147:1758–1766, 1767 .
e1-4.
 14. Roman MJ, Rosen SE, Kramer-Fox R, et al. Prognostic significance of the 
pattern of aortic root dilation in the Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1993;22:1470–1476.
 15. Morris SA, Orbach DB, Geva T, et al. Increased vertebral artery tortuosity 
index is associated with adverse outcomes in children and young adults with 
connective tissue disorders. Circulation. 2011;124:388–396.
6.1.2.2.4. Marfan Syndrome Interventions: Replacement 
of Primary (Nondissected) Aneurysms of the Aortic Arch, 
Descending, and Abdominal Aorta in Patients With Marfan 
Syndrome
 1. den Hartog AW, Franken R, Zwinderman AH, et al. The risk for type B aortic 
dissection in Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:246–254.
 2. LeMaire SA, Carter SA, Volguina IV, et al. Spectrum of aortic operations in 
300 patients with confirmed or suspected Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2006;81:2063–2078; discussion 2078.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e451
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 3. Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Lowry AM, et al. Beyond the aortic root: staged open 
and endovascular repair of arch and descending aorta in patients with con-
nective tissue disorders. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;101:906–912.
 4. Schoenhoff FS, Yildiz M, Langhammer B, et al. The fate of nonaortic arterial 
segments in Marfan patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:2150–
2156.
 5. Engelfriet PM, Boersma E, Tijssen JG, et al. Beyond the root: dilatation of 
the distal aorta in Marfan’s syndrome. Heart. 2006;92:1238–1243.
 6. Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in the mod-
erately dilated ascending aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1209–1219.
 7 . Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al. Clinical features and out-
comes of pregnancy-related acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol. 
2021;6:58–66.
6.1.2.3.1. Imaging in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
 1. Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by muta-
tions in the TGF-beta receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:788–798.
 2. MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a prim-
er for diagnosis and management. Genet Med. 2014;16:576–587 .
 3. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 4. van der Linde D, van de Laar IM, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al. Aggressive car-
diovascular phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by 
pathogenic SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:397–403.
 5. Bulder RMA, Eefting D, Vriens P, et al. Editor’s choice - a systemic evaluation 
of the costs of elective EVAR and open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair 
implies cost equivalence. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:655–662.
 6. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 7 . Kitagawa A, Greenberg RK, Eagleton MJ, et al. Fenestrated and branched 
endovascular aortic repair for chronic type B aortic dissection with thora-
coabdominal aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2013;58:625–634.
 8. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 9. Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3 pathogenic variants: 
risk for thoracic aortic disease and associated complications from the Mon-
talcino Aortic Consortium. J Med Genet. 2019;56:252–260.
 10. van de Laar IM, van der Linde D, Oei EH, et al. Phenotypic spectrum of 
the SMAD3-related aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome. J Med Genet. 
2012;49:47–57 .
 11. Huguenard AL, Gupta VP, Braverman AC, et al. Genetic and heritable con-
siderations in patients or families with both intracranial and extracranial an-
eurysms. J Neurosurg. 2021;134:1999–2006.
 12. van der LD, van d LI, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al. Aggressive cardiovascular 
phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by pathogenic 
SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:397–403.
 13. Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Mutations in a TGF-beta ligand, 
TGFB3, cause syndromic aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2015;65:1324–1336.
 14. Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause familial thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections associated with mild systemic features of 
Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012;44:916–921.
 15. Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Bolar NA, et al. Loss-of-function mutations in 
TGFB2 cause a syndromic presentation of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Nat 
Genet. 2012;44:922–927 .
 16. Schepers D, Tortora G, Morisaki H, et al. A mutation update on the LDS-
associated genes TGFB2/3 and SMAD2/3. Hum Mutat. 2018;.
 17 . Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: genetic testing in the 
diagnosis and management of patients with aortic disease. Heart. 
2021;107:619–626.
 18. Patel ND, Alejo D, Crawford T, et al. Aortic root replacement for children with 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103:1513–1518.
 19. Schoenhoff FS, Alejo DE, Black JH, et al. Management of the aortic 
arch in patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2020;160:1166–1175.
 20. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Villamizar C, et al. Exome sequencing identi-
fies SMAD3 mutations as a cause of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm 
and dissection with intracranial and other arterial aneurysms. Circ Res. 
2011;109:680–686.
6.1.2.3.2. Medical Therapy in Loeys-Dietz Syndrome
 1. MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a prim-
er for diagnosis and management. Genet Med. 2014;16:576–587 .
 2. Gallo EM, Loch DC, Habashi JP, et al. Angiotensin II-dependent TGF-beta 
signaling contributes to Loeys-Dietz syndrome vascular pathogenesis. J Clin 
Invest. 2014;124:448–460.
6.1.2.3.3. Loeys-Dietz Syndrome Surgical Interventions: 
Replacement of the Aorta in Patients With Loeys-Dietz 
Syndrome
 1. Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by muta-
tions in the TGF-beta receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:788–798.
 2. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 3. van der LD, van d LI, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al. Aggressive cardiovascular 
phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by pathogenic 
SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:397–403.
 4. Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3 pathogenic variants: 
risk for thoracic aortic disease and associated complications from the Mon-
talcino Aortic Consortium. J Med Genet. 2019;56:252–260.
 5. Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause familial thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections associated with mild systemic features of 
Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012;44:916–921.
 6. Lindsay ME, Schepers D, Bolar NA, et al. Loss-of-function mutations in 
TGFB2 cause a syndromic presentation of thoracic aortic aneurysm. Nat 
Genet. 2012;44:922–927 .
 7 . Renard M, Callewaert B, Baetens M, et al. Novel MYH11 and ACTA2 muta-
tions reveal a role for enhanced TGFss signaling in FTAAD. Int J Cardiol. 
2013;165:314–321.
 8. Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Mutations in a TGF-beta ligand, 
TGFB3, cause syndromic aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2015;65:1324–1336.
 9. Marsili L, Overwater E, Hanna N, et al. Phenotypic spectrum of TGFB3 
disease-causing variants in a Dutch-French cohort and first report of a ho-
mozygous patient. Clin Genet. 2020;97:723–730.
 10. MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a prim-
er for diagnosis and management. Genet Med. 2014;16:576–587 .
 11. Patel ND, Crawford T, Magruder JT, et al. Cardiovascular operations for 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome: intermediate-term results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2017;153:406–412.
 12. Aftab M, Cikach FS, Zhu Y, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: intermediate-term 
outcomes of medically and surgically managed patients. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2019;157:439–450.e5.
 13. Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3 pathogenic variants: 
risk for thoracic aortic disease and associated complications from the Mon-
talcino Aortic Consortium. J Med Genet. 2019;56:252–260.
 14. Renard M, Callewaert B, Malfait F, et al. Thoracic aortic-aneurysm and dis-
section in association with significant mitral valve disease caused by muta-
tions in TGFB2. Int J Cardiol. 2013;165:584–587 .
 15. van de Laar IM, Oldenburg RA, Pals G, et al. Mutations in SMAD3 cause a 
syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteo-
arthritis. Nat Genet. 2011;43:121–126.
 16. van der Linde D, van de Laar IM, Bertoli-Avella AM, et al. Aggressive car-
diovascular phenotype of aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome caused by 
pathogenic SMAD3 variants. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:397–403.
 17 . Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of multigenerational families 
with thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 
mutations. J Med Genet. 2009;46:607–613.
 18. Schoenhoff FS, Alejo DE, Black JH, et al. Management of the aortic 
arch in patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2020;160:1166–1175.
 19. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 20. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e452
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 21. Singh KK, Rommel K, Mishra A, et al. TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 mutations in 
patients with features of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Hum 
Mutat. 2006;27:770–777 .
 22. Skeik N, Golden M, Berg A, et al. T ype A aortic dissection caused by Loeys-
Dietz syndrome with novel variation. Ann Vasc Surg. 2020;68:567 .e1–567 .4.
 23. Bertoli-Avella AM, Gillis E, Morisaki H, et al. Mutations in a TGF-beta ligand, 
TGFB3, cause syndromic aortic aneurysms and dissections. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2015;65:1324–1336.
6.1.2.4. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome: Imaging, Medical 
Therapy, and Surgical Intervention
 1. Shalhub S, Byers PH, Hicks KL, et al. A multi-institutional experience in 
the aortic and arterial pathology in individuals with genetically confirmed 
vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J Vasc Surg. 2019;70:1543–1554.
 2. Shalhub S, Black JH 3rd, Cecchi AC, et al. Molecular diagnosis in vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome predicts pattern of arterial involvement and out-
comes. J Vasc Surg. 2014;60:160–169.
 3. Benrashid E, Ohman JW. Current management of the vascular subtype of 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2020;35:603–609.
 4. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 5. Brooke BS, Arnaoutakis G, McDonnell NB, et al. Contemporary manage-
ment of vascular complications associated with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J 
Vasc Surg. 2010;51:131–138; discussion 138–139.
 6. Sage L, Russo ML, Byers PH, et al. Setting a research agenda for vascu-
lar Ehlers-Danlos syndrome using a patient and stakeholder engagement 
model. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:1436–1444.e2.
 7 . Ong KT, Perdu J, De Backer J, et al. Effect of celiprolol on prevention 
of cardiovascular events in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a pro-
spective randomised, open, blinded-endpoints trial. Lancet. 2010;376: 
1476–1484.
 8. Frank M, Adham S, Seigle S, et al. Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: long-
term observational study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:1948–1957 .
 9. Murray ML, Pepin M, Peterson S, et al. Pregnancy-related deaths and com-
plications in women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Genet Med. 
2014;16:874–880.
 10. Byers PH, Belmont J, Black J, et al. Diagnosis, natural history, and manage-
ment in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med 
Genet. 2017;175:40–47 .
 11. Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic 
disease data from the Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart. 
2021;107:1704–1709.
 12. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC 
guidelines for the management of cardiovascular diseases during preg-
nancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.
6.1.2.5. Turner Syndrome
 1. Mazzanti L, Cacciari E. Congenital heart disease in patients with Turner’s 
syndrome. Italian Study Group for Turner Syndrome (ISGTS). J Pediatr. 
1998;133:688–692.
 2. Sybert VP. Cardiovascular malformations and complications in Turner syn-
drome. Pediatrics. 1998;101:E11.
 3. Volkl TM, Degenhardt K, Koch A, et al. Cardiovascular anomalies in children 
and young adults with Ullrich-Turner syndrome the Erlangen experience. Clin 
Cardiol. 2005;28:88–92.
 4. Gotzsche CO, Krag-Olsen B, Nielsen J, et al. Prevalence of cardiovascular 
malformations and association with karyotypes in Turner’s syndrome. Arch 
Dis Child. 1994;71:433–436.
 5. Mazzanti L, Prandstraller D, Tassinari D, et al. Heart disease in Turner’s syn-
drome. Helv Paediatr Acta. 1988;43:25–31.
 6. Kim HK, Gottliebson W, Hor K, et al. Cardiovascular anomalies in Turner 
syndrome: spectrum, prevalence, and cardiac MRI findings in a pediatric and 
young adult population. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;196:454–460.
 7 . Ho VB, Bakalov VK, Cooley M, et al. Major vascular anomalies in Turner 
syndrome - prevalence and magnetic resonance angiographic features. Cir-
culation. 2004;110:1694–1700.
 8. Loscalzo ML, Van PL, Ho VB, et al. Association between fetal lymphede-
ma and congenital cardiovascular defects in Turner syndrome. Pediatrics. 
2005;115:732–735.
 9. Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH, et al. Cardiovascular 
health in Turner syndrome: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2018;11:e000048.
 10. Matura LA, Ho VB, Rosing DR, et al. Aortic dilatation and dissection in Turn-
er syndrome. Circulation. 2007;116:1663–1670.
 11. Carlson M, Airhart N, Lopez L, et al. Moderate aortic enlargement and bi-
cuspid aortic valve are associated with aortic dissection in Turner syndrome: 
report of the international turner syndrome aortic dissection registry. Circula-
tion. 2012;126:2220–2226.
 12. Gravholt CH, Andersen NH, Conway GS, et al. Clinical practice guidelines 
for the care of girls and women with Turner syndrome: proceedings from the 
2016 Cincinnati International Turner Syndrome Meeting. Eur J Endocrinol. 
2017;177:G1–G70.
 13. Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in Turner syndrome: two 
cases and review of 85 cases in the literature. J Med Genet. 2007;44:745–
74 9.
 14. Quezada E, Lapidus J, Shaughnessy R, et al. Aortic dimensions in Turner 
syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2015;167A:2527–2532.
6.1.2.6. Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic Variants in ACTA2, 
PRKG1, MYH11, MYLK, and LOX: Recommendations for 
Surveillance of Aorta, Medical Therapy, and Aortic Surgical 
Intervention
 1. Guo DC, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. LOX Mutations Predispose to Thoracic 
Aortic Aneurysms and Dissections. Circ Res. 2016;118:928–934.
 2. Guo DC, Pannu H, Papke CL, et al. Mutations in smooth muscle alpha-
actin (ACTA2) lead to thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections. Nat Genet. 
2007;39:1488–1493.
 3. Wang L, Guo DC, Cao J, et al. Mutations in Myosin light chain kinase cause 
familial aortic dissections. Am J Hum Genet. 2010;87:701–707 .
 4. Pannu H, Tran-Fadulu V, Papke CL, et al. MYH11 mutations result in a dis-
tinct vascular pathology driven by insulin-like growth factor 1 and angioten-
sin II. Hum Mol Genet. 2007;16:3453–3462.
 5. Guo DC, Papke CL, Tran-Fadulu V, et al. Mutations in smooth muscle alpha-
actin (ACTA2) cause coronary artery disease, stroke, and moyamoya dis-
ease, along with thoracic aortic disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2009;84:617–
627 .
 6. Milewicz DM, Ostergaard JR, la-Kokko LM, et al. De novo ACTA2 mutation 
causes a novel syndrome of multisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction. Am 
J Med Genet A. 2010;152A:2437–2443.
 7 . Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic disease presentation 
and outcome associated with ACTA2 mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2015;8:457–464.
 8. Lauer A, Speroni SL, Patel JB, et al. Cerebrovascular disease progres-
sion in patients with ACTA2 Arg179 pathogenic variants. Neurology. 
2021;96:e538–e552.
 9. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Prakash S, et al. Aortic disease presentation 
and outcome associated with ACTA2 mutations. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 
2015;8:457–464.
 10. Galian-Gay L, Carro Hevia A, Teixido-Tura G, et al. Familial clustering of 
bicuspid aortic valve and its relationship with aortic dilation in first-degree 
relatives. Heart. 2019;105:603–608.
 11. Guo DC, Regalado E, Casteel DE, et al. Recurrent gain-of-function mutation 
in PRKG1 causes thoracic aortic aneurysms and acute aortic dissections. 
Am J Hum Genet. 2013;93:398–404.
 12. Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural history of type B aortic 
dissection in patients with PRKG1 mutation c.530G>A (p.Arg177Gln). J 
Vasc Surg. 2019;70:718–723.
 13. Gago-Diaz M, Blanco-Verea A, Teixido G, et al. PRKG1 and genetic 
diagnosis of early-onset thoracic aortic disease. Eur J Clin Invest. 
2016;46:787–794.
 14. Zhu L, Vranckx R, Khau Van KP, et al. Mutations in myosin heavy chain 11 
cause a syndrome associating thoracic aortic aneurysm/aortic dissection 
and patent ductus arteriosus. Nat Genet. 2006;38:343–349.
 15. Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK pathogenic variants aortic 
disease presentation, pregnancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic 
missense variants. Genet Med. 2019;21:144–151.
 16. Luyckx I, Proost D, Hendriks JM, et al. Two novel MYLK nonsense mutations 
causing thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections in patients without apparent 
family history. Clin Genet. 2017;92:444–446.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e453
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 17 . Lee VS, Halabi CM, Hoffman EP, et al. Loss of function mutation in LOX 
causes thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection in humans. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2016;113:8759–8764.
 18. Cirnu A, Kolokotronis K, Walz K, et al. Novel mutation in LOX associates with 
a complex aneurysmal vascular and cardiac phenotype. Circ Genom Precis 
Med. 2021;14:e003217 .
6.1.3. BAV Aortopathy
 1. Kang JW, Song HG, Yang DH, et al. Association between bicuspid aortic 
valve phenotype and patterns of valvular dysfunction and bicuspid aortopa-
thy: comprehensive evaluation using MDCT and echocardiography. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Img. 2013;6:150–161.
 2. Della Corte A, Bancone C, Buonocore M, et al. Pattern of ascending aortic 
dimensions predicts the growth rate of the aorta in patients with bicuspid 
aortic valve. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2013;6:1301–1310.
 3. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 4. Schaefer BM, Lewin MB, Stout KK, et al. The bicuspid aortic valve: an inte-
grated phenotypic classification of leaflet morphology and aortic root shape. 
Heart. 2008;94:1634–1638.
 5. Bravo-Jaimes K, Prakash SK. Genetics in bicuspid aortic valve disease: 
where are we? Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2020;63:398–406.
 6. Gillis E, Kumar AA, Luyckx I, et al. Candidate gene resequencing in a large 
bicuspid aortic valve-associated thoracic aortic aneurysm cohort: SMAD6 
as an important contributor. Front Physiol. 2017;8:400.
 7 . Loscalzo ML, Goh DL, Loeys B, et al. Familial thoracic aortic dilation and 
bicommissural aortic valve: a prospective analysis of natural history and in-
heritance. Am J Med Genet A. 2007;143:1960–1967 .
 8. Galian-Gay L, Carro Hevia A, Teixido-Tura G, et al. Familial clustering of 
bicuspid aortic valve and its relationship with aortic dilation in first-degree 
relatives. Heart. 2019;105:603–608.
 9. Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Du Marchie Sarvaas GJ, Ruiter JS, et al. Left ven-
tricular outflow tract obstruction: should cardiac screening be offered to 
first-degree relatives? Heart. 2011;97:1228–1232.
 10. Cripe L, Andelfinger G, Martin LJ, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve is heritable. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:138–143.
 11. Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Incidence of aortic complica-
tions in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. JAMA. 2011;306:1104–1112.
 12. Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspid aortic valve. N 
Engl J Med. 2014;370:1920–1929.
 13. Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic dissection in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve-associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2015;100:1666–1673; discussion 1673–1674.
 14. McKellar SH, Michelena HI, Li Z, et al. Long-term risk of aortic events fol-
lowing aortic valve replacement in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. Am J 
Cardiol. 2010;106:1626–1633.
 15. Sperling JS, Lubat E. Forme fruste or ‘incomplete’ bicuspid aortic valves with 
very small raphes: the prevalence of bicuspid valve and its significance may 
be underestimated. Int J Cardiol. 2015;184:1–5.
 16. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 .
 17 . Musunuru K, Hershberger RE, Day SM, et al. Genetic testing for inherited 
cardiovascular diseases: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2020;13:e000067 .
 18. Tessler I, Leshno M, Shmueli A, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of screen-
ing for first-degree relatives of patients with bicuspid aortic valve. Eur Heart 
J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2021;7:447–457 .
6.1.3.1. Routine Follow-Up of BAV Disease Aortopathy
 1. Michelena HI, Desjardins VA, Avierinos JF, et al. Natural history of asymp-
tomatic patients with normally functioning or minimally dysfunctional bicus-
pid aortic valve in the community. Circulation. 2008;117:2776–2784.
 2. Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Incidence of aortic complica-
tions in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. JAMA. 2011;306:1104–1112.
 3. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late aortic events after an 
isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with con-
comitant ascending aortic dilation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42:832–
837; discussion 837–838.
 4. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Rouman M, et al. Aortic events after isolated aortic 
valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve root phenotype: echocardio-
graphic follow-up study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48:e71–e76.
 5. Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspid aortic valve. N 
Engl J Med. 2014;370:1920–1929.
 6. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 7 . Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The American Association for Tho-
racic Surgery consensus guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopa-
thy: full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:e41–e74.
 8. McKellar SH, Michelena HI, Li Z, et al. Long-term risk of aortic events fol-
lowing aortic valve replacement in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. Am J 
Cardiol. 2010;106:1626–1633.
 9. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Borger MA, et al. Long-term prognosis of ascending 
aortic aneurysm after aortic valve replacement for bicuspid versus tricuspid 
aortic valve stenosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147:276–282.
 10. Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. Aortic dissection after previous 
aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;66:1409–1411.
 11. Avadhani SA, Martin-Doyle W, Shaikh AY, et al. Predictors of ascending aor-
tic dilation in bicuspid aortic valve disease: a five-year prospective study. Am 
J Med. 2015;128:647–652.
 12. Devereux RB, de Simone G, Arnett DK, et al. Normal limits in relation to age, 
body size and gender of two-dimensional echocardiographic aortic root di-
mensions in persons ≥15 years of age. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1189–1194.
6.1.3.2. BAV Aortopathy Interventions: Replacement of the Aorta 
in Patients With BAV
 1. Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The American Association for Tho-
racic Surgery consensus guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related aortopa-
thy: full online-only version. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:e41–e74.
 2. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 .
 3. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 4. Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Cosgrove DM III. Surgical options in young 
adults with aortic valve disease. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2003;28:417–480.
 5. Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic dissection in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve-associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2015;100:1666–1673; discussion 1673–1674.
 6. Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the ascending aorta be re-
placed more frequently in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128:677–683.
 7 . Braverman AC. Aortic replacement for bicuspid aortic valve aortopathy: 
when and why? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:520–525.
 8. Michelena HI, Khanna AD, Mahoney D, et al. Incidence of aortic complica-
tions in patients with bicuspid aortic valves. JAMA. 2011;306:1104–1112.
 9. Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather than body surface area, 
suffices for risk estimation in ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1938–1950.
 10. Chen Y, Lin Y, Zhang H, et al. Relationship of platelet counts and inflam-
matory markers to 30-day mortality risk in patients with acute type A aortic 
dissection. Biomed Res Int. 2020;2020:1057496.
 11. Oliver JM, Alonso-Gonzalez R, Gonzalez AE, et al. Risk of aortic root or as-
cending aorta complications in patients with bicuspid aortic valve with and 
without coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1001–1006.
 12. Duijnhouwer A, van den Hoven A, Merkx R, et al. Differences in aortopathy 
in patients with a bicuspid aortic valve with or without aortic coarctation. J 
Clin Med. 2020;9:290.
 13. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late aortic events after an 
isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with con-
comitant ascending aortic dilation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42:832–
837; discussion 837–838.
 14. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Rouman M, et al. Aortic events after isolated aortic 
valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve root phenotype: echocardio-
graphic follow-up study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48:e71–e76.
 15. Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in the mod-
erately dilated ascending aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1209–1219.
6.2. AAA: Cause, Risk Factors, and Screening
 1. Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Senger CA, et al. Primary care screening for 
abdominal aortic aneurysm: updated evidence report and systematic review 
for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA. 2019;322:2219–2238.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e454
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 2. Sakalihasan N, Defraigne JO, Kerstenne MA, et al. Family members of pa-
tients with abdominal aortic aneurysms are at increased risk for aneurysms: 
analysis of 618 probands and their families from the Liege AAA Family 
Study. Ann Vasc Surg. 2014;28:787–797 .
 3. Kuivaniemi H, Shibamura H, Arthur C, et al. Familial abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms: collection of 233 multiplex families. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:340–345.
 4. Carter JL, Morris DR, Sherliker P, et al. Sex-specific associations of vas-
cular risk factors with abdominal aortic aneurysm: findings from 1.5 million 
women and 0.8 million men in the United States and United Kingdom. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014748.
 5. Dansey KD, Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, et al. Epidemiology of en-
dovascular and open repair for abdominal aortic aneurysms in the United 
States from 2004–2015 and implications for screening. J Vasc Surg. 
2021;74:414–424.
 6. Linne A, Forsberg J, Lindstrom D, et al. Age at detection of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms in siblings of patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc 
Surg. 2016;63:883–887 .
 7 . Davies MJ. Aortic aneurysm formation: lessons from human studies and 
experimental models. Circulation. 1998;98:193–195.
 8. Sakalihasan N, Michel JB, Katsargyris A, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. 
Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4:34.
 9. Kent KC, Zwolak RM, Egorova NN, et al. Analysis of risk factors for abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm in a cohort of more than 3 million individuals. J Vasc 
Surg. 2010;52:539–548.
 10. Altobelli E, Rapacchietta L, Profeta VF, et al. Risk factors for abdominal aor-
tic aneurysm in population-based studies: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018;15:2805.
 11. Tang W, Yao L, Roetker NS, et al. Lifetime risk and risk factors for ab-
dominal aortic aneurysm in a 24-year prospective study: the ARIC Study 
(Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities). Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2016;36:2468–2477 .
 12. Larsson E, Granath F, Swedenborg J, et al. A population-based case-con-
trol study of the familial risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 
2009;49:47–50; discussion 51.
 13. Saadoun D, Vautier M, Cacoub P. Medium- and large-vessel vasculitis. Circu-
lation. 2021;143:267–282.
 14. Sorelius K, Budtz-Lilly J, Mani K, et al. Systematic review of the management 
of mycotic aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2019;58:426–435.
 15. Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
expansion: risk factors and time intervals for surveillance. Circulation. 
2004;110:16–21.
 16. Sweeting MJ, Thompson SG, Brown LC, et al. Meta-analysis of individual 
patient data to examine factors affecting growth and rupture of small ab-
dominal aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg. 2012;99:655–665.
 17 . Akai A, Watanabe Y, Hoshina K, et al. Family history of aortic aneurysm is 
an independent risk factor for more rapid growth of small abdominal aortic 
aneurysms in Japan. J Vasc Surg. 2015;61:287–290.
 18. Howard DP, Banerjee A, Fairhead JF, et al. Population-based study of 
incidence of acute abdominal aortic aneurysms with projected impact of 
screening strategy. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e001926.
6.3. Growth and Natural History of Aortic Aneurysms
 1. Bashir M, Fok M, Hammoud I, et al. A perspective on natural history and 
survival in nonoperated thoracic aortic aneurysm patients. Aorta (Stamford). 
2013;1:182–189.
 2. Harky A, Bashir M, Antoniou A, et al. Size and dissection: what is the rela-
tion? Indian J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;35:72–78.
 3. Kuzmik GA, Sang AX, Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic an-
eurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56:565–571.
 4. Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural history of aortic root 
aneurysms in Marfan syndrome. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;6:625–632.
 5. Della Corte A, Bancone C, Buonocore M, et al. Pattern of ascending aortic 
dimensions predicts the growth rate of the aorta in patients with bicuspid 
aortic valve. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2013;6:1301–1310.
 6. Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in the mod-
erately dilated ascending aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1209–1219.
 7 . Yiu RS, Cheng SW. Natural history and risk factors for rupture of thoracic 
aortic arch aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2016;63:1189–1194.
 8. Zafar MA, Chen JF, Wu J, et al. Natural history of descending thorac-
ic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2021;161:498–511.e1.
 9. Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of small abdominal aortic 
aneurysms assessed by computerised tomography-a systematic literature 
review. Atherosclerosis. 2014;235:182–188.
6.4. Medical Management of Sporadic and Degenerative Aortic 
Aneurysm Disease
 1. Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary 
prevention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular dis-
ease: 2006 update. Circulation. 2006;113:2363–2372.
 2. Davies MJ. Aortic aneurysm formation: lessons from human studies and 
experimental models. Circulation. 1998;98:193–195.
 3. Danyi P, Elefteriades JA, Jovin IS. Medical therapy of thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: are we there yet? Circulation. 2011;124:1469–1476.
6.4.1.1. BP Management in Sporadic TAA
 1. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the preven-
tion, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in 
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 
2018;71:1269–1324.
 2. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual 
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for 
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–1913.
 3. Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute benefit of lowering 
blood pressure in hypertensive patients according to the JNC VI risk strati-
fication. Hypertension. 2000;35:539–543.
 4. Ladouceur M, Fermanian C, Lupoglazoff JM, et al. Effect of beta-blockade 
on ascending aortic dilatation in children with the Marfan syndrome. Am J 
Cardiol. 2007;99:406–409.
 5. Shores J, Berger KR, Murphy EA, et al. Progression of aortic dilatation and 
the benefit of long-term beta-adrenergic blockade in Marfan’s syndrome. N 
Engl J Med. 1994;330:1335–1341.
 6. Al-Abcha A, Saleh Y, Mujer M, et al. Meta-analysis examining the useful-
ness of angiotensin receptor blockers for the prevention of aortic root dila-
tion in patients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2020;128:101–
106.
 7 . Howard DP, Banerjee A, Fairhead JF, et al. Population-based study of in-
cidence and outcome of acute aortic dissection and premorbid risk fac-
tor control: 10-year results from the Oxford Vascular Study. Circulation. 
2013;127:2031–2037 .
 8. Danyi P, Elefteriades JA, Jovin IS. Medical therapy of thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms: are we there yet? Circulation. 2011;124:1469–1476.
 9. Hofmann Bowman MA, Eagle KA, Milewicz DM. Update on clinical trials of 
losartan with and without β-blockers to block aneurysm growth in patients 
with Marfan syndrome: a review. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:702–707 .
 10. Group SR, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al. A randomized trial of intensive 
versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103–
2116.
 11. Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Juraschek SP, et al. Assessment of long-
term benefit of intensive blood pressure control on residual life span: sec-
ondary analysis of the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT). 
JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:576–581.
 12. Mochizuki S, Shimizu M, Taniguchi I, et al. JIKEI HEART Study-a mor -
bi-mortality and remodeling study with valsartan in Japanese patients 
with hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 
2004;18:305–309.
 13. Mochizuki S, Dahlof B, Shimizu M, et al. Valsartan in a Japanese population 
with hypertension and other cardiovascular disease (Jikei Heart Study): a 
randomised, open-label, blinded endpoint morbidity-mortality study. Lancet. 
2007;369:1431–1439.
6.4.1.2. Treatment of TAA With Statins
 1. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 2. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell 
L, et al. Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: 
a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. 
Lancet. 2010;376:1670–1681.
 3. Angeloni E, Vitaterna A, Pirelli M, et al. Effects of statin therapy on ascend-
ing aorta aneurysms growth: a propensity-matched analysis. Int J Cardiol. 
2015;191:52–55.
 4. Goel SS, Tuzcu EM, Agarwal S, et al. Comparison of ascending aortic size 
in patients with severe bicuspid aortic valve stenosis treated with versus 
without a statin drug. Am J Cardiol. 2011;108:1458–1462.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e455
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 5. Stein LH, Berger J, Tranquilli M, et al. Effect of statin drugs on thoracic aortic 
aneurysms. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1240–1245.
 6. Taylor AP, Yadlapati A, Andrei AC, et al. Statin use and aneurysm risk in 
patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease. Clin Cardiol. 2016;39:41–47 .
 7 . Sato T, Arakawa M, Tashima Y, et al. Statins Reduce Thoracic Aortic Aneu-
rysm Growth in Marfan Syndrome Mice via Inhibition of the Ras-Induced 
ERK (Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase) Signaling Pathway. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e008543.
 8. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cho-
lesterol in Adults. Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evalu-
ation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment 
Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285:2486–2497 .
 9. Gerhard-Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, et al. 2016 AHA/ACC guideline on 
the management of patients with lower extremity peripheral artery disease: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2017;135:e686–e725.
 10. Evans J, Powell JT, Schwalbe E, et al. Simvastatin attenuates the activity of 
matrix metalloprotease-9 in aneurysmal aortic tissue. Eur J Vasc Endovasc 
Surg. 2007;34:302–303.
 11. Diehm N, Becker G, Katzen B, et al. Statins are associated with decreased 
mortality in abdominal, but not in thoracic aortic aneurysm patients un-
dergoing endovascular repair: propensity score-adjusted analysis. Vasa. 
2008;37:241–249.
 12. Allar BG, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al. Preoperative statin therapy is as-
sociated with higher 5-year survival after thoracic endovascular aortic repair. 
J Vasc Surg. 2021;74:1996-2005.
6.4.1.3. Smoking Cessation in TAA
 1. Katz DA, Holman JE, Nugent AS, et al. The emergency department action in 
smoking cessation (EDASC) trial: impact on cessation outcomes. Nicotine 
Tob Res. 2013;15:1032-1043.
 2. Whitlock EP, Orleans CT, Pender N, et al. Evaluating primary care behav-
ioral counseling interventions: an evidence-based approach. Am J Prev Med. 
2002;22:267-284.
 3. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 
2008 update. Clinical practice guideline. US Dept. of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Public Health Service. May 2008.
 4. Berry KM, Reynolds LM, Collins JM, et al. E-cigarette initiation and associ -
ated changes in smoking cessation and reduction: the Population Assess-
ment of Tobacco and Health Study, 2013-2015. Tob Control. 2019;28:42-
49.
 5. Dapunt OE, Galla JD, Sadeghi AM, et al. The natural history of thoracic aor-
tic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107:1323-1332; discussion 
1332-1333.
 6. Gu BH, Choi JC, Shen YH, et al. Elastin-specific autoimmunity in smokers 
with thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection is independent of chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e011671.
 7 . Fetterman JL, Keith RJ, Palmisano JN, et al. Alterations in vascular func-
tion associated with the use of combustible and electronic cigarettes. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014570.
 8. Fetterman JL, Weisbrod RM, Feng B, et al. Flavorings in tobacco prod-
ucts induce endothelial cell dysfunction. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2018;38:1607-1615.
6.4.1.4. Antiplatelet Therapy in TAA
 1. Smith SC, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary pre-
vention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular dis-
ease: 2006 update. Circulation. 2006;113:2363–2372.
 2. Agmon Y, Khandheria BK, Meissner I, et al. Relation of coronary artery dis-
ease and cerebrovascular disease with atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta 
in the general population. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:262-267 .
 3. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cho-
lesterol in Adults. Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evalu-
ation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment 
Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285:2486-2497 .
6.4.2.1. BP Management in AAA
 1. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:1269–1324.
 2. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual 
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for 
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903-1913.
 3. Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute benefit of lowering 
blood pressure in hypertensive patients according to the JNC VI risk strati-
fication. Hypertension. 2000;35:539-543.
 4. Group SR, Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al. A randomized trial of intensive ver-
sus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2103-2116.
 5. Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Juraschek SP, et al. Assessment of long-
term benefit of intensive blood pressure control on residual life span: sec-
ondary analysis of the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT). 
JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:576-581.
6.4.2.2. Treatment of AAA With Statins
 1. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:1269–1324.
 2. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual 
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for 
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903-1913.
 3. Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute benefit of lowering 
blood pressure in hypertensive patients according to the JNC VI risk strati-
fication. Hypertension. 2000;35:539-543.
 4. Salata K, Syed M, Hussain MA, et al. Statins Reduce Abdominal Aortic An-
eurysm Growth, Rupture, and Perioperative Mortality: A Systematic Review 
and Meta-Analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e008657 .
 5. Ferguson CD, Clancy P, Bourke B, et al. Association of statin prescrip-
tion with small abdominal aortic aneurysm progression. Am Heart J. 
2010;159:307-313.
 6. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cho-
lesterol in Adults. Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evalu-
ation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment 
Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285:2486-2497 .
 7 . Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration, Baigent C, Blackwell 
L, et al. Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: 
a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. 
Lancet. 2010;376:1670-1681.
 8. Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, De BJ, et al. Clinical history and manage-
ment recommendations of the smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome due to 
ACTA2 arginine 179 alterations. Genet Med. 2018;20:1206-1215.
 9. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 10. Wemmelund H, Hogh A, Hundborg HH, et al. Statin use and rupture of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg. 2014;101:966-975.
 11. Leurs LJ, Visser P, Laheij RJ, et al. Statin use is associated with reduced 
all-cause mortality after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. 
Vascular. 2006;14:1-8.
 12. O’Donnell TFX, Deery SE, Shean KE, et al. Statin therapy is associated with 
higher long-term but not perioperative survival after abdominal aortic aneu-
rysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2018;68:392-399.
6.4.2.3. Smoking Cessation in AAA
 1. Katz DA, Holman JE, Nugent AS, et al. The emergency department action in 
smoking cessation (EDASC) trial: impact on cessation outcomes. Nicotine 
Tob Res. 2013;15:1032-1043.
 2. Whitlock EP, Orleans CT, Pender N, et al. Evaluating primary care behav-
ioral counseling interventions: an evidence-based approach. Am J Prev Med. 
2002;22:267-284.
 3. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 
2008 update. Clinical practice guideline. US Dept. of Health and Human Ser-
vices. Public Health Service. May 2008.
 4. Berry KM, Reynolds LM, Collins JM, et al. E-cigarette initiation and associat-
ed changes in smoking cessation and reduction: the Population Assessment 
of Tobacco and Health Study, 2013-2015. Tob Control. 2019;28:42-49.
6.4.2.4. Antithrombotic Therapy in AAA
 1. Wemmelund H, Jorgensen TM, Hogh A, et al. Low-dose aspirin and rupture 
of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2017;65:616-625.e4.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e456
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 2. Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cho-
lesterol in Adults. Executive summary of the third report of the National 
Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evalu-
ation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment 
Panel III). JAMA. 2001;285:2486-2497 .
 3. Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary 
prevention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular dis-
ease: 2006 update. Circulation. 2006;113:2363–2372.
6.4.3.1. Surveillance of Thoracic Aortic Dilation and Aneurysm
 1. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 2. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873-2926.
 3. Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Multimodality imaging of dis-
eases of the thoracic aorta in adults: from the American Society of Echocar-
diography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:119-182.
 4. Wang TKM, Desai MY. Thoracic aortic aneurysm: optimal surveillance and 
treatment. Cleve Clin J Med. 2020;87:557-568.
 5. Agarwal PP, Chughtai A, Matzinger FR, et al. Multidetector CT of thoracic 
aortic aneurysms. Radiographics. 2009;29:537-552.
 6. Freeman LA, Young PM, Foley TA, et al. CT and MRI assessment of the 
aortic root and ascending aorta. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2013;200:W581-
W592.
 7 . Poskaite P, Pamminger M, Kranewitter C, et al. Self-navigated 3D whole-
heart MRA for non-enhanced surveillance of thoracic aortic dilation: a com-
parison to CTA. Magn Reson Imaging. 2021;76:123-130.
 8. Kuzmik GA, Sang AX, Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic an-
eurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56:565-571.
 9. Gagne-Loranger M, Dumont E, Voisine P, et al. Natural history of 40-50 mm 
root/ascending aortic aneurysms in the current era of dedicated thoracic 
aortic clinics. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;50:562-566.
6.4.3.2. Surveillance of Abdominal Aortic Dilation and Aneurysm
 1. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873-2926.
 2. Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
expansion: risk factors and time intervals for surveillance. Circulation. 
2004;110:16-21.
 3. Marcaccio CL, Schermerhorn ML. Epidemiology of abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms. Semin Vasc Surg. 2021;34:29-37 .
 4. RESCAN Collaborators, Bown MJ, Sweeting MJ, et al. Surveillance in-
tervals for small abdominal aortic aneurysms: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2013;309:806-813.
 5. Badger SA, Jones C, McClements J, et al. Surveillance strategies accord-
ing to the rate of growth of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc Med. 
2011;16:415-421.
 6. Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of small abdominal aortic 
aneurysms assessed by computerised tomography-a systematic literature 
review. Atherosclerosis. 2014;235:182-188.
 7 . Oliver-Williams C, Sweeting MJ, Jacomelli J, et al. Safety of men with small 
and medium abdominal aortic aneurysms under surveillance in the NAAASP. 
Circulation. 2019;139:1371-1380.
 8. Thompson S, Brown L, Sweeting M, et al. Systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of the growth and rupture rates of small abdominal aortic aneurysms: 
implications for surveillance intervals and their cost-effectiveness. Health 
Technol Assess. 2013;17:1-118.
 9. Salehi Ravesh M, Langguth P, Pfarr JA, et al. Non-contrast-enhanced mag-
netic resonance imaging for visualization and quantification of endovascular 
aortic prosthesis, their endoleaks and aneurysm sacs at 1.5T. Magn Reson 
Imaging. 2019;60:164-172.
 10. Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of noncontrast magnetic reso-
nance angiography for aneurysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks after 
endovascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol. 2021;22:513-524.
 11. Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The Society for Vascular Sur-
gery practice guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:2-77 .e72.
6.5. Surgical and Endovascular Management of Aortic 
Aneurysms
 1. Schanzer A, Greenberg RK, Hevelone N, et al. Predictors of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm sac enlargement after endovascular repair. Circulation. 
2011;123:2848-2855.
6.5.1. Surgery for Sporadic Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and 
Ascending Aorta
 1. Kouchoukos NT. Composite graft replacement of the ascending aorta and 
aortic valve with the inclusion-wrap and open techniques. Semin Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 1991;3:171-176.
 2. Mehta RH, Suzuki T, Hagan PG, et al. Predicting death in patients with acute 
type A aortic dissection. Circulation. 2002;105:200-206.
 3. Borger MA, Fedak PWM, Stephens EH, et al. The American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery consensus guidelines on bicuspid aortic valve-related 
aortopathy: executive summary. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:473- 
480.
 4. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 5. Hiratzka LF, Creager MA, Isselbacher EM, et al. Surgery for aortic dilatation 
in patients with bicuspid aortic valves: a statement of clarification from the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2016;133:680–686.
 6. Svensson LG, Adams DH, Bonow RO, et al. Aortic valve and ascending 
aorta guidelines for management and quality measures. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95:S1-S66.
 7 . Coady MA, Rizzo JA, Hammond GL, et al. What is the appropriate size cri-
terion for resection of thoracic aortic aneurysms? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1997;113:476-491.
 8. Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Y early rupture or dissection rates 
for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2002;73:17-27; discussion 27-28.
 9. Ziganshin BA, Zafar MA, Elefteriades JA. Descending threshold for ascend-
ing aortic aneurysmectomy: is it time for a “left-shift” in guidelines? J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:37-42.
 10. Avadhani SA, Martin-Doyle W, Shaikh AY, et al. Predictors of ascending aor-
tic dilation in bicuspid aortic valve disease: a five-year prospective study. Am 
J Med. 2015;128:647-652.
 11. Kerneis C, Pasi N, Arangalage D, et al. Ascending aorta dilatation rates in 
patients with tricuspid and bicuspid aortic stenosis: the COFRASA/GEN-
ERAC study. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2018;19:792-799.
 12. Oladokun D, Patterson BO, Sobocinski J, et al. Systematic review of the 
growth rates and influencing factors in thoracic aortic aneurysms. Eur J 
Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;51:674-681.
 13. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno -
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873-2926.
 14. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with bicuspid aortic valve and a dilated as-
cending aorta. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;10:e006249.
 15. Masri A, Kalahasti V, Svensson LG, et al. Aortic cross-sectional area/height 
ratio and outcomes in patients with a trileaflet aortic valve and a dilated 
aorta. Circulation. 2016;134:1724-1737 .
 16. Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic dissection in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve-associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2015;100:1666-1673; discussion 1673-1674.
 17 . Kim JB, Spotnitz M, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in the mod-
erately dilated ascending aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:1209-1219.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e457
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 18. Idrees JJ, Roselli EE, Blackstone EH, et al. Risk of adding prophylac-
tic aorta replacement to a cardiac operation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2020;159:1669-1678.e10.
 19. Hui SK, Fan CS, Christie S, et al. The aortic root does not dilate over time 
after replacement of the aortic valve and ascending aorta in patients with 
bicuspid or tricuspid aortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:5-
13.e11.
 20. Peterss S, Bhandari R, Rizzo JA, et al. The aortic root: natural history after 
root-sparing ascending replacement in nonsyndromic aneurysmal patients. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103:828-833.
 21. Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic valve disease with ascend-
ing aortic aneurysm: Impact of concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) 
aortic replacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;152:791-798.e1.
 22. Acharya MN, Youssefi P, Soppa G, et al. Analysis of aortic area/height ratio 
in patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm and type A dissection. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg. 2018;54:696-701.
 23. Zafar MA, Li Y, Rizzo JA, et al. Height alone, rather than body surface area, 
suffices for risk estimation in ascending aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1938-1950.
 24. Thubrikar MJ, Agali P, Robicsek F. Wall stress as a possible mechanism for 
the development of transverse intimal tears in aortic dissections. J Med Eng 
Technol. 1999;23:127-134.
 25. Emerel L, Thunes J, Kickliter T, et al. Predissection-derived geometric and 
distensibility indices reveal increased peak longitudinal stress and stiffness 
in patients sustaining acute type A aortic dissection: implications for predict-
ing dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;158:355-363.
 26. Plonek T, Zak M, Rylski B, et al. Wall stress correlates with intimal entry 
tear localization in type A aortic dissection. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 
2018;27:797-801.
 27 . Gomez A, Wang Z, Xuan Y, et al. Abstract 16886: wall stress profiles in 
tricuspid aortic valve associated ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms: the 
effect of surgical threshold diameter ≥5.5cm. Circulation. 2020;142(suppl 
3):A16886.
 28. Pichamuthu JE, Phillippi JA, Cleary DA, et al. Differential tensile strength 
and collagen composition in ascending aortic aneurysms by aortic valve 
phenotype. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;96:2147-2154.
 29. Bollache E, Guzzardi DG, Sattari S, et al. Aortic valve-mediated wall shear 
stress is heterogeneous and predicts regional aortic elastic fiber thinning 
in bicuspid aortic valve-associated aortopathy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2018;156:2112-2120.e2.
 30. Emmott A, Garcia J, Chung J, et al. Biomechanics of the ascending 
thoracic aorta: a clinical perspective on engineering data. Can J Cardiol. 
2016;32:35-47 .
 31. Rylski B, Blanke P, Beyersdorf F, et al. How does the ascending aorta geom-
etry change when it dissects? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1311-1319.
 32. Pape LA, Tsai TT, Isselbacher EM, et al. Aortic diameter > or = 5.5 cm 
is not a good predictor of type A aortic dissection: observations from 
the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation. 
2007;116:1120-1127 .
 33. Saeyeldin A, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Decision-making algorithm for ascending 
aortic aneurysm: effectiveness in clinical application? J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2019;157:1733-1745.
 34. Gagne-Loranger M, Dumont E, Voisine P, et al. Natural history of 40-50 mm 
root/ascending aortic aneurysms in the current era of dedicated thoracic 
aortic clinics. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;50:562-566.
 35. Elefteriades JA, Mukherjee SK, Mojibian H. Discrepancies in measurement 
of the thoracic aorta: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;76:201-217 .
 36. Guo MH, Appoo JJ, Saczkowski R, et al. Association of mortality and acute 
aortic events with ascending aortic aneurysm: a systematic review and me-
ta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2018;1:e181281.
 37 . Paruchuri V, Salhab KF, Kuzmik G, et al. Aortic size distribution in the gen-
eral population: explaining the size paradox in aortic dissection. Cardiology. 
2015;131:265-272.
 38. Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk profiles and volume-
outcome relationships in proximal thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;106:1095-1104.
 39. Guo MH, Appoo JJ, Wells GA, et al. Protocol for a randomised controlled 
trial for Treatment in Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm: Surgery versus Surveillance 
(TITAN: SvS). BMJ Open. 2021;11:e052070.
 40. Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. Aortic dissection after previous 
aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;66:1409-1411.
 41. Kaneko T, Shekar P, Ivkovic V, et al. Should the dilated ascending aorta be 
repaired at the time of bicuspid aortic valve replacement? Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2018;53:560-568.
 42. Svensson LG, Kim KH, Blackstone EH, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve sur-
gery with proactive ascending aorta repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2011;142:622-629, 629.e1-3.
 43. Borger MA, Preston M, Ivanov J, et al. Should the ascending aorta be re-
placed more frequently in patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease? J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;128:677-683.
 44. Mansour AM, Peterss S, Zafar MA, et al. Prevention of aortic dissection 
suggests a diameter shift to a lower aortic size threshold for intervention. 
Cardiology. 2018;139:139-146.
 45. Heuts S, Adriaans BP, Gerretsen S, et al. Aortic elongation part II: the risk of 
acute type A aortic dissection. Heart. 2018;104:1778-1782.
 46. Kruger T, Sandoval Boburg R, Lescan M, et al. Aortic elongation in aortic an-
eurysm and dissection: the Tubingen Aortic Pathoanatomy (TAIPAN) project. 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;54:26-33.
 47 . Wu J, Zafar MA, Li Y, et al. Ascending aortic length and risk of aortic adverse 
events: the neglected dimension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1883-1894.
 48. Gomez A, Wang Z, Xuan Y, et al. Wall stress distribution in bicuspid aortic 
valve-associated ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2020;110:807-814.
 49. Wang Z, Flores N, Lum M, et al. Wall stress analyses in patients with ≥5 
cm versus <5 cm ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2021;162:1452-1459.
 50. Xuan Y, Wang Z, Liu R, et al. Wall stress on ascending thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms with bicuspid compared with tricuspid aortic valve. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;156:492-500.
6.5.1.1. Surgical Approach for Patients With Sporadic 
Aneurysms of the Aortic Root and Ascending Aorta Meeting 
Criteria for Surgery
 1. Mori M, Shioda K, Wang X, et al. Perioperative risk profiles and volume-
outcome relationships in proximal thoracic aortic surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;106:1095-1104.
 2. Mullan CW, Mori M, Bin Mahmood SU, et al. Incidence and characteris-
tics of hospitalization for proximal aortic surgery for acute syndromes and 
for aneurysms in the USA from 2005 to 2014. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2020;58:583-589.
 3. Girdauskas E, Rouman M, Disha K, et al. The fate of mild-to-moderate 
proximal aortic dilatation after isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid 
aortic valve stenosis: a magnetic resonance imaging follow-up study. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49:e80-e86; discussion e86-e87 .
 4. Hui SK, Fan CS, Christie S, et al. The aortic root does not dilate over time 
after replacement of the aortic valve and ascending aorta in patients with 
bicuspid or tricuspid aortic valves. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:5-
13.e11.
 5. Peterss S, Bhandari R, Rizzo JA, et al. The aortic root: natural history after 
root-sparing ascending replacement in nonsyndromic aneurysmal patients. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103:828-833.
 6. Vendramin I, Meneguzzi M, Sponga S, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve disease 
and ascending aortic aneurysm: should an aortic root replacement be man-
datory? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49:103-109.
 7 . Preventza O, Coselli JS, Price MD, et al. Elective primary aortic root replace-
ment with and without hemiarch repair in patients with no previous cardiac 
surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153:1402-1408.
 8. McCarthy FH, Bavaria JE, McDermott KM, et al. At the root of the repair 
debate: outcomes after elective aortic root replacements for aortic insuf-
ficiency with aneurysm. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102:1199-1205.
 9. David TE, David CM, Ouzounian M, et al. A progress report on reimplantation 
of the aortic valve. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;161:890-899.e1.
 10. Kari FA, Doll KN, Hemmer W, et al. Survival and freedom from aortic valve-
related reoperation after valve-sparing aortic root replacement in 1015 pa-
tients. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016;22:431-438.
 11. Lenoir M, Maesen B, Stevens LM, et al. Reimplantation versus remodel-
ling with ring annuloplasty: comparison of mid-term outcomes after valve-
sparing aortic root replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;54:48-54.
 12. Arabkhani B, Mookhoek A, Di Centa I, et al. Reported outcome after valve-
sparing aortic root replacement for aortic root aneurysm: a systematic re-
view and meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100:1126-1131.
 13. Flynn CD, Tian DH, Wilson-Smith A, et al. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of surgical outcomes in Marfan patients undergoing aortic root 
surgery by composite-valve graft or valve sparing root replacement. Ann 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;6:570-581.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e458
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 14. Kari FA, Russe MF, Peter P, et al. Late complications and distal growth 
rates of Marfan aortas after proximal aortic repair. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2013;44:163-171.
 15. Price J, Magruder JT, Young A, et al. Long-term outcomes of aortic root 
operations for Marfan syndrome: a comparison of Bentall versus aortic 
valve-sparing procedures. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151:330-
336.
 16. Schoenhoff FS, Jungi S, Czerny M, et al. Acute aortic dissection determines 
the fate of initially untreated aortic segments in Marfan syndrome. Circula-
tion. 2013;127:1569-1575.
 17 . Schoenhoff FS, Kadner A, Czerny M, et al. Should aortic arch replacement 
be performed during initial surgery for aortic root aneurysm in patients with 
Marfan syndrome? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44:346-351; discussion 
351.
 18. Schoenhoff FS, Langhammer B, Wustmann K, et al. Decision-making in aor-
tic root surgery in Marfan syndrome: bleeding, thromboembolism and risk of 
reintervention after valve-sparing or mechanical aortic root replacement. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48:931-935; discussion 935-936.
 19. Aftab M, Cikach FS, Zhu Y, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: intermediate-term 
outcomes of medically and surgically managed patients. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2019;157:439-450.e5.
 20. Patel ND, Crawford T, Magruder JT, et al. Cardiovascular operations for 
Loeys-Dietz syndrome: intermediate-term results. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2017;153:406-412.
 21. Coselli JS, Hughes MS, Green SY, et al. Valve-sparing aortic root re-
placement: early and midterm outcomes in 83 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2014;97:1267-1273; discussion 1273-1274.
 22. Idrees JJ, Roselli EE, Blackstone EH, et al. Risk of adding prophylac-
tic aorta replacement to a cardiac operation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2020;159:1669-1678.e10.
 23. Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic valve disease with ascend-
ing aortic aneurysm: Impact of concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) 
aortic replacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;152:791-798.e1.
 24. Rinewalt D, McCarthy PM, Malaisrie SC, et al. Effect of aortic aneurysm 
replacement on outcomes after bicuspid aortic valve surgery: validation of 
contemporary guidelines. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:2060-2069.
 25. Girdauskas E, Disha K, Raisin HH, et al. Risk of late aortic events after an 
isolated aortic valve replacement for bicuspid aortic valve stenosis with con-
comitant ascending aortic dilation. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;42:832-
837; discussion 837-838.
 26. Wallen T, Habertheuer A, Bavaria JE, et al. Elective aortic root replacement 
in North America: analysis of STS Adult Cardiac Surgery Database. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2019;107:1307-1312.
6.5.2. Aortic Arch Aneurysms
 1. Isselbacher EM. Thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms. Circulation. 
2005;111:816-828.
 2. Coady MA, Rizzo JA, Hammond GL, et al. What is the appropriate size cri-
terion for resection of thoracic aortic aneurysms? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1997;113:476-491.
 3. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873-2926.
 4. Sultan S, Kavanagh EP, Diethrich E, et al. A clinical review of early outcomes 
from contemporary flow modulation versus open, fenestrated and branch 
technologies in the management of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. 
Vascular. 2018;26:209-215.
 5. Malaisrie SC, Duncan BF, Mehta CK, et al. The addition of hemiarch replace-
ment to aortic root surgery does not affect safety. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;150:118-124.e2.
 6. Shrestha M, Bachet J, Bavaria J, et al. Current status and recommendations 
for use of the frozen elephant trunk technique: a position paper by the Vas-
cular Domain of EACTS. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;47:759-769.
 7 . Hanif H, Dubois L, Ouzounian M, et al. Aortic arch reconstructive surgery 
with conventional techniques vs frozen elephant trunk: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Can J Cardiol. 2018;34:262-273.
 8. Yuan SM. Hoarseness due to aortic arch aneurysms. Braz J Cardiovasc Surg. 
2020;35:970-976.
 9. Peterson MD, Garg V, Mazer CD, et al. A randomized trial comparing axil-
lary versus innominate artery cannulation for aortic arch surgery. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;S0022-5223:33143-3.
 10. Harky A, Grafton-Clarke C, Hadlett M, et al. In thoracic aortic surgery, is in-
nominate artery cannulation a safe and effective alternative to axillary artery 
cannulation? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2019;29:604-607 .
 11. Preventza O, Price MD, Spiliotopoulos K, et al. In elective arch surgery with 
circulatory arrest, does the arterial cannulation site really matter? A pro-
pensity score analysis of right axillary and innominate artery cannulation. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;155:1953-1960.e4.
 12. Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Rajeswaran J, et al. Does the arterial can-
nulation site for circulatory arrest influence stroke risk? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2004;78:1274-1284.
 13. Tian WZ, Er JX, Liu L, et al. Effects of autologous platelet rich plasma on 
intraoperative transfusion and short-term outcomes in total arch replace-
ment (Sun’s procedure): a prospective, randomized trial. J Cardiothorac Vasc 
Anesth. 2019;33:2163-2169.
 14. Tian DH, Weller J, Hasmat S, et al. Temperature selection in antegrade ce-
rebral perfusion for aortic arch surgery: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2019;108:283-291.
 15. Svensson LG, Blackstone EH, Apperson-Hansen C, et al. Implications 
from neurologic assessment of brain protection for total arch replacement 
from a randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150:1140-
1147 .e11.
 16. Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, De BJ, et al. Clinical history and manage-
ment recommendations of the smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome due to 
ACTA2 arginine 179 alterations. Genet Med. 2018;20:1206-1215.
 17 . MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a prim-
er for diagnosis and management. Genet Med. 2014;16:576-587 .
 18. Svensson LG, Rushing GD, Valenzuela ES, et al. Modifications, classifi-
cations, and outcomes of elephant-trunk procedures. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;96:548–558.
 19. Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Current options and recommendations 
for the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: 
an expert consensus document of the European Association for Cardio-
Thoracic surgery (EACTS) and the European Society for Vascular Surgery 
(ESVS). Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;55:133-162.
 20. Azuma T, Yokoi Y, Yamazaki K. The next generation of fenestrated endo-
grafts: results of a clinical trial to support an expanded indication for aortic 
arch aneurysm treatment. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44:e156-e163; 
discussion e163.
 21. Furuta A, Azuma T, Yokoi Y, et al. The midterm results of thoracic endovas-
cular aortic repair with a precurved fenestrated endograft in zone 0-1. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;58:722-729.
 22. Bavaria J, Vallabhajosyula P, Moeller P, et al. Hybrid approaches in the treat-
ment of aortic arch aneurysms: postoperative and midterm outcomes. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:S85-S90.
 23. Preventza O, Tan CW, Orozco-Sevilla V, et al. Zone zero hybrid arch ex -
clusion versus open total arch replacement. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 
2018;7:372-379.
 24. Preventza O, Garcia A, Cooley DA, et al. Total aortic arch replacement: a 
comparative study of zone 0 hybrid arch exclusion versus traditional open 
repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;150:1591-1598; discussion 1598-
1600.
 25. Patel R, Sweeting MJ, Powell JT, et al. Endovascular versus open repair of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm in 15-years’ follow-up of the UK endovascular 
aneurysm repair trial 1 (EVAR trial 1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2016;388:2366-2374.
 26. Haulon S, Greenberg RK, Spear R, et al. Global experience with an inner 
branched arch endograft. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:1709-1716.
6.5.3.1. Size Thresholds for Repair of Descending TAA
 1. Kim JB, Kim K, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of rupture or dissection in descend-
ing thoracic aortic aneurysm. Circulation. 2015;132:1620-1629.
 2. Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Y early rupture or dissection rates 
for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2002;73:17-27; discussion 27-28.
 3. Lobato AC, Puech-Leao P. Predictive factors for rupture of thoracoabdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 1998;27:446-453.
 4. Juvonen T, Ergin MA, Galla JD, et al. Prospective study of the natural history 
of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 1997;63:1533-1545.
 5. Nathan DP, Xu C, Pouch AM, et al. Increased wall stress of saccular ver-
sus fusiform aneurysms of the descending thoracic aorta. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2011;25:1129-1137 .
 6. Oderich GS, Panneton JM, Bower TC, et al. Infected aortic aneurysms: ag-
gressive presentation, complicated early outcome, but durable results. J 
Vasc Surg. 2001;34:900-908.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e459
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 7 . Harris DG, Olson SL, Panthofer AM, et al. A frailty-based risk score predicts 
morbidity and mortality after elective endovascular repair of descending tho-
racic aortic aneurysms. Ann Vasc Surg. 2020;67:90-99.
 8. Schermerhorn ML, Giles KA, Hamdan AD, et al. Population-based out-
comes of open descending thoracic aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:821-827 .
 9. Girardi LN, Leonard JR, Lau C, et al. Gender-related outcomes after open 
repair of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J 
Vasc Surg. 2019;69:1028-1035.e1.
6.5.3.2. Endovascular Versus Open Repair of Descending TAA
 1. Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Kee ST, et al. Endovascular treatment of tho-
racic aortic aneurysms: results of the phase II multicenter trial of the GORE 
TAG thoracic endoprosthesis. J Vasc Surg. 2005;41:1-9.
 2. Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. International controlled clinical 
trial of thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2 endovas-
cular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:247-257; discussion 257 .
 3. Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal results of the Medtronic Vas-
cular Talent Thoracic Stent Graft System: the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:546-554.
 4. Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after open versus endovascu-
lar thoracic aortic aneurysm repair in an observational study of the Medicare 
population. Circulation. 2011;124:2661-2669.
 5. Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al. Gender related access com-
plications after TEVAR: analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre Cohort 
GORE® GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:203-
209.
 6. Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical repair of 2286 tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:S862-S864; 
discussion S890-S892.
 7 . Girardi LN, Leonard JR, Lau C, et al. Gender-related outcomes after open 
repair of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J 
Vasc Surg. 2019;69:1028-1035.e1.
 8. Estrera AL, Jan A, Sandhu H, et al. Outcomes of open repair for chronic 
descending thoracic aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;99:786-793; 
discussion 794.
 9. Pujara AC, Roselli EE, Hernandez AV, et al. Open repair of chronic distal 
aortic dissection in the endovascular era: implications for disease manage-
ment. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:866-873.
 10. Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. International controlled clinical 
trial of thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2 endovas-
cular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:247-257; discussion 257 .
 11. Fairman AS, Beck AW, Malas MB, et al. Reinterventions in the modern era of 
thoracic endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2020;71:408-422.
 12. Patel VI, Mukhopadhyay S, Ergul E, et al. Impact of hospital volume and 
type on outcomes of open and endovascular repair of descending tho-
racic aneurysms in the United States Medicare population. J Vasc Surg. 
2013;58:346-354.
 13. Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, et al. Five-year results of endo-
vascular treatment with the Gore TAG device compared with open repair of 
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:912-918.
 14. Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Outcomes of 3309 tho -
racoabdominal aortic aneurysm repairs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:1323-1337 .
 15. Patel HJ, Dake MD, Bavaria JE, et al. Branched endovascular therapy of the 
distal aortic arch: preliminary results of the feasibility multicenter trial of the 
Gore Thoracic Branch Endoprosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102:1190-
1198.
 16. Tong MZ, Eagleton MJ, Roselli EE, et al. Outcomes of open versus endovas-
cular repair of descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2022;113:1144–1152.
6.5.3.3. Left Subclavian Artery Management
 1. Cooper DG, Walsh SR, Sadat U, et al. Neurological complications after left 
subclavian artery coverage during thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1594-1601.
 2. Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic complications associated with 
endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pathology: Incidence and risk factors. 
a study from the European Collaborators on Stent/Graft Techniques for 
Aortic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR) registry. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:1103-
1110; discussion 1110-1111.
 3. Nakamura E, Nakamura K, Furukawa K, et al. Left subclavian artery revas-
cularization for delayed paralysis after thoracic endovascular aortic repair. 
Ann Vasc Dis. 2019;12:233-235.
 4. Kotelis D, Geisbusch P, Hinz U, et al. Short and midterm results after left 
subclavian artery coverage during endovascular repair of the thoracic aorta. 
J Vasc Surg. 2009;50:1285-1292.
 5. Patel HJ, Dake MD, Bavaria JE, et al. Branched endovascular therapy of the dis-
tal aortic arch: preliminary results of the feasibility multicenter trial of the Gore 
Thoracic Branch Endoprosthesis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102:1190-1198.
 6. Roselli EE, Arko FR 3rd, Thompson MM, et al. Results of the Valiant Mona 
LSA early feasibility study for descending thoracic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2015;62:1465-1471.e3.
 7 . Waterford SD, Chou D, Bombien R, et al. Left subclavian arterial coverage 
and stroke during thoracic aortic endografting: a systematic review. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2016;101:381-389.
 8. von Allmen RS, Gahl B, Powell JT. Editor’s choice - incidence of stroke fol-
lowing thoracic endovascular aortic repair for descending aortic aneurysm: 
a systematic review of the literature with meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg. 2017;53:176-184.
 9. Woo EY, Carpenter JP, Jackson BM, et al. Left subclavian artery cover-
age during thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a single-center experience. J 
Vasc Surg. 2008;48:555-560.
 10. Rizvi AZ, Murad MH, Fairman RM, et al. The effect of left subclavian artery 
coverage on morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing endovascular 
thoracic aortic interventions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc 
Surg. 2009;50:1159-1169.
6.5.3.4. Celiac Artery Management
 1. Rose MK, Pearce BJ, Matthews TC, et al. Outcomes after celiac artery cov-
erage during thoracic endovascular aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 
2015;62:36-42.
 2. Vaddineni SK, Taylor SM, Patterson MA, et al. Outcome after celiac artery 
coverage during endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: preliminary 
results. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45:467-471.
 3. Mehta M, Darling RC 3rd, Taggert JB, et al. Outcomes of planned celiac 
artery coverage during TEVAR. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52:1153-1158.
6.5.3.5. Ruptured Descending TAA
 1. Jonker FH, Verhagen HJ, Lin PH, et al. Open surgery versus endovascular 
repair of ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:1210-
1216.
 2. Jonker FH, Trimarchi S, Verhagen HJ, et al. Meta-analysis of open versus 
endovascular repair for ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm. J 
Vasc Surg. 2010;51:1026-1032, 1032.e1-1032.e2.
 3. Patel HJ, Williams DM, Upchurch GR Jr, et al. A comparative analysis of 
open and endovascular repair for the ruptured descending thoracic aorta. J 
Vasc Surg. 2009;50:1265-1270.
 4. Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after open versus endovascu-
lar thoracic aortic aneurysm repair in an observational study of the Medicare 
population. Circulation. 2011;124:2661-2669.
 5. Cambria RP, Crawford RS, Cho JS, et al. A multicenter clinical trial of endo-
vascular stent graft repair of acute catastrophes of the descending thoracic 
aorta. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50:1255-1264.e1-4.
 6. Banno H, Ikeda S, Kawai Y, et al. Early and midterm outcomes of celiac 
artery coverage during thoracic endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 
2020;72:1552-1557 .
 7 . Vaddineni SK, Taylor SM, Patterson MA, et al. Outcome after celiac artery 
coverage during endovascular thoracic aortic aneurysm repair: preliminary 
results. J Vasc Surg. 2007;45:467-471.
6.5.3.6. Access Issues for TEVAR in Descending TAA
 1. Jackson BM, Woo EY, Bavaria JE, et al. Gender analysis of the pivotal re-
sults of the Medtronic Talent Thoracic Stent Graft System (VALOR) trial. J 
Vasc Surg. 2011;54:358-363, 363.e1.
 2. Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al. Gender related access com-
plications after TEVAR: analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre Cohort 
GORE® GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:203-
209.
 3. Baxter RD, Hansen SK, Gable CE, et al. Outcomes of open versus percu-
taneous access for patients enrolled in the GREAT registry. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2021;70:370-377 .
 4. Lee WA, Brown MP, Nelson PR, et al. Midterm outcomes of femoral arteries 
after percutaneous endovascular aortic repair using the Preclose technique. 
J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:919-923.
 5. de Souza LR, Oderich GS, Banga PV, et al. Outcomes of total percutaneous 
endovascular aortic repair for thoracic, fenestrated, and branched endo-
grafts. J Vasc Surg. 2015;62:1442-1449.e3.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e460
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 6. Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Kee ST, et al. Endovascular treatment of tho-
racic aortic aneurysms: results of the phase II multicenter trial of the GORE 
TAG thoracic endoprosthesis. J Vasc Surg. 2005;41:1-9.
 7 . Matsumura JS, Cambria RP, Dake MD, et al. International controlled clinical 
trial of thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair with the Zenith TX2 endovas-
cular graft: 1-year results. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:247-257; discussion 257 .
 8. Fairman RM, Criado F, Farber M, et al. Pivotal results of the Medtronic Vas-
cular Talent Thoracic Stent Graft System: the VALOR trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:546-554.
6.5.4.1. Size Thresholds for Open Surgical Repair of TAAA
 1. Kim JB, Kim K, Lindsay ME, et al. Risk of rupture or dissection in descend-
ing thoracic aortic aneurysm. Circulation. 2015;132:1620-1629.
 2. Davies RR, Goldstein LJ, Coady MA, et al. Y early rupture or dissection rates 
for thoracic aortic aneurysms: simple prediction based on size. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2002;73:17-27; discussion 27-28.
 3. Zafar MA, Chen JF, Wu J, et al. Natural history of descending thorac-
ic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2021;161:498-511.e1.
 4. Lobato AC, Puech-Leao P. Predictive factors for rupture of thoracoabdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 1998;27:446-453.
 5. Gambardella I, Gaudino MFL, Rahouma M, et al. Impact of left ventricular 
ejection fraction on the outcomes of open repair of descending thoracic and 
thoracoabdominal aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;161:534-
541.e5.
 6. Girardi LN, Lau C, Ohmes LB, et al. Open repair of descending and 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in octogenarians. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;68:1287-1296.e3.
 7 . Juvonen J, Surcel HM, Satta J, et al. Elevated circulating levels of inflam-
matory cytokines in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol. 1997;17:2843-2847 .
 8. Elefteriades JA. Natural history of thoracic aortic aneurysms: indica-
tions for surgery, and surgical versus nonsurgical risks. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2002;74:S1877-S1880.
6.5.4.2. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of TAAA
 1. Walsh K, O’Connor DJ, Weaver F, et al. Survival after endovascular ther-
apy in patients with ruptured thoracic aortic diseases: results from the 
Global Registry for Endovascular Aortic Treatment Registry. J Vasc Surg. 
2020;72:1544-1551.
 2. Hammo S, Larzon T, Hultgren R, et al. Outcome after endovascular repair of 
ruptured descending thoracic aortic aneurysm: a national multicentre study. 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2019;57:788-794.
 3. Goodney PP, Travis L, Lucas FL, et al. Survival after open versus endovascu-
lar thoracic aortic aneurysm repair in an observational study of the Medicare 
population. Circulation. 2011;124:2661-2669.
 4. Ogawa Y, Watkins AC, Lingala B, et al. Improved midterm outcomes af-
ter endovascular repair of nontraumatic descending thoracic aortic rupture 
compared with open surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;161:2004-
2012.
 5. Gaudino M, Lau C, Munjal M, et al. Open repair of ruptured descending 
thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;150:814-821.
 6. Clough RE, Martin-Gonzalez T, Van Calster K, et al. Endovascular Repair of 
Thoracoabdominal and Arch Aneurysms in Patients with Connective Tis-
sue Disease Using Branched and Fenestrated Devices. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2017;44:158-163.
 7 . Pacini D, Parolari A, Berretta P, et al. Endovascular treatment for type 
B dissection in Marfan syndrome: is it worthwhile? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95:737-749.
 8. Coselli JS, Green SY, Price MD, et al. Results of open surgical repair in 
patients with Marfan syndrome and distal aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;101:2193-2201.
 9. Waterford SD, Gardner RL, Moon MR. Extent of aortic replacement in type 
A dissection: current answers for an endless debate. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;106:1246-1250.
 10. Aucoin VJ, Eagleton MJ, Farber MA, et al. Spinal cord protection practices 
used during endovascular repair of complex aortic aneurysms by the U.S. 
Aortic Research Consortium. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:323-330.
 11. Scali ST, Kim M, Kubilis P, et al. Implementation of a bundled protocol sig-
nificantly reduces risk of spinal cord ischemia after branched or fenestrated 
endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:409-423.e4.
 12. Banga PV, Oderich GS, Reis de Souza L, et al. Neuromonitoring, cerebrospi-
nal fluid drainage, and selective use of iliofemoral conduits to minimize risk 
of spinal cord injury during complex endovascular aortic repair. J Endovasc 
Ther. 2016;23:139-149.
 13. Oderich GS, Tenorio ER, Mendes BC, et al. Midterm outcomes of a pro-
spective, nonrandomized study to evaluate endovascular repair of com-
plex aortic aneurysms using fenestrated-branched endografts. Ann Surg. 
2021;274:491-499.
 14. Kolbel T, Spanos K, Jama K, et al. Early outcomes of the t-Branch off-
the-shelf multi-branched stent graft in 542 patients for elective and ur-
gent aortic pathologies - a retrospective observational study. J Vasc Surg. 
2021;S0741-5214:00916-2.
 15. Eagleton MJ, Follansbee M, Wolski K, et al. Fenestrated and branched en-
dovascular aneurysm repair outcomes for type II and III thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2016;63:930-942.
6.5.4.3. TAAA Spinal Cord Protection
 1. Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Outcomes of 3309 thoracoabdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm repairs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151:1323-1337 .
 2. Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Koksoy C, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid drainage re-
duces paraplegia after thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: results of 
a randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg. 2002;35:631-639.
 3. Girardi LN, Lau C, Ohmes LB, et al. Open repair of descending and 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in octogenarians. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;68:1287-1296.e3.
 4. Khan FM, Naik A, Hameed I, et al. Open repair of descending thoracic and 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2020;110:1941-1949.
 5. Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Huynh TT, et al. Neurologic outcome after tho-
racic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2001;72:1225-1230; discussion 1230-1231.
 6. Wong CS, Healy D, Canning C, et al. A systematic review of spinal cord 
injury and cerebrospinal fluid drainage after thoracic aortic endografting. J 
Vasc Surg. 2012;56:1438-1447 .
 7 . Wynn MM, Sebranek J, Marks E, et al. Complications of spinal fluid drainage 
in thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm surgery in 724 patients 
treated from 1987 to 2013. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2015;29:342-350.
 8. Sandhu HK, Evans JD, Tanaka A, et al. Fluctuations in Spinal Cord Perfu-
sion Pressure: A Harbinger of Delayed Paraplegia After Thoracoabdominal 
Aortic Repair. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;29:451-459.
 9. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 10. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873-2926.
 11. Crawford ES, Svensson LG, Hess KR, et al. A prospective randomized study of 
cerebrospinal fluid drainage to prevent paraplegia after high-risk surgery on 
the thoracoabdominal aorta. J Vasc Surg. 1991;13:36-45; discussion 45-46.
 12. Chatterjee S, Casar JG, LeMaire SA, et al. Perioperative care after thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair: The Baylor College of Medicine ex-
perience. Part 2: postoperative management. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2021;161:699-705.
 13. Lima B, Nowicki ER, Blackstone EH, et al. Spinal cord protective strate-
gies during descending and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair in the 
modern era: the role of intrathecal papaverine. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;143:945-952.e941.
 14. Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Huynh TT, et al. Preoperative and operative pre-
dictors of delayed neurologic deficit following repair of thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysm. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126:1288-1294.
6.5.4.4. TAAA Renal and Visceral Organ Protection
 1. Moulakakis KG, Karaolanis G, Antonopoulos CN, et al. Open repair of 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in experienced centers. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;68:634-645.e612.
 2. Coselli JS, LeMaire SA, Preventza O, et al. Outcomes of 3309 thoracoab-
dominal aortic aneurysm repairs. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;151:1323-
1337 .
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e461
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 3. Murana G, Castrovinci S, Kloppenburg G, et al. Open thoracoabdominal aor-
tic aneurysm repair in the modern era: results from a 20-year single-centre 
experience. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49:1374-1381.
 4. Khan FM, Naik A, Hameed I, et al. Open repair of descending thoracic and 
thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2020;110:1941-1949.
 5. Lemaire SA, Jones MM, Conklin LD, et al. Randomized comparison of cold 
blood and cold crystalloid renal perfusion for renal protection during thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:11-19; discus-
sion 19.
 6. Koksoy C, LeMaire SA, Curling PE, et al. Renal perfusion during thoracoab-
dominal aortic operations: cold crystalloid is superior to normothermic blood. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2002;73:730-738.
 7 . Svensson LG, Crawford ES, Hess KR, et al. Thoracoabdominal aortic aneu-
rysms associated with celiac, superior mesenteric, and renal artery occlu-
sive disease: methods and analysis of results in 271 patients. J Vasc Surg. 
1992;16:378-389; discussion 389-390.
6.5.5.1. Access During Endovascular Repair of AAA
 1. Vierhout BP, Pol RA, Ott MA, et al. Randomized multicenter trial on percuta-
neous versus open access in endovascular aneurysm repair (PiERO). J Vasc 
Surg. 2019;69:1429-1436.
 2. Siracuse JJ, Farber A, Kalish JA, et al. Comparison of access type on peri-
operative outcomes after endovascular aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;68:91-99.
 3. Nelson PR, Kracjer Z, Kansal N, et al. A multicenter, randomized, con-
trolled trial of totally percutaneous access versus open femoral exposure 
for endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (the PEVAR trial). J Vasc Surg. 
2014;59:1181-1193.
 4. Kalish J, Eslami M, Gillespie D, et al. Routine use of ultrasound guidance in 
femoral arterial access for peripheral vascular intervention decreases groin 
hematoma rates. J Vasc Surg. 2015;61:1231-1238.
6.5.5.2. Repair of Ruptured AAA
 1. Starnes BW, Quiroga E, Hutter C, et al. Management of ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm in the endovascular era. J Vasc Surg. 2010;51:9-17; dis-
cussion 17-18.
 2. Powell JT, Sweeting MJ, Thompson MM, et al. Endovascular or open repair 
strategy for ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm: 30 day outcomes from 
IMPROVE randomised trial. BMJ. 2014;348:f7661.
 3. Mehta M, Taggert J, Darling RC 3rd, et al. Establishing a protocol for endo-
vascular treatment of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms: outcomes of a 
prospective analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44:1-8; discussion 8.
 4. Kontopodis N, Galanakis N, Antoniou SA, et al. Meta-analysis and meta-
regression analysis of outcomes of endovascular and open repair for rup-
tured abdominal aortic aneurysm. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;59: 
399-410.
 5. Tan TW, Eslami M, Rybin D, et al. Outcomes of endovascular and open surgi-
cal repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms in elderly patients. J Vasc 
Surg. 2017;66:64-70.
 6. Wang LJ, Locham S, Al-Nouri O, et al. Endovascular repair of ruptured ab-
dominal aortic aneurysm is superior to open repair: propensity-matched 
analysis in the Vascular Quality Initiative. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:498-507 .
 7 . Powell JT, Hinchliffe RJ, Thompson MM, et al. Observations from the IM-
PROVE trial concerning the clinical care of patients with ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg. 2014;101:216-224; discussion 224.
 8. Faizer R, Weinhandl E, El Hag S, et al. Decreased mortality with local versus 
general anesthesia in endovascular aneurysm repair for ruptured abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm in the Vascular Quality Initiative database. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;70:92-101.e101.
 9. Mouton R, Rogers CA, Harris RA, et al. Local anaesthesia for endo-
vascular repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg. 
2019;106:74-81.
 10. Veith FJ, Ohki T, Lipsitz EC, et al. Endovascular grafts and other catheter-
directed techniques in the management of ruptured abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms. Semin Vasc Surg. 2003;16:326-331.
 11. Bickell WH, Wall MJ Jr, Pepe PE, et al. Immediate versus delayed fluid re-
suscitation for hypotensive patients with penetrating torso injuries. N Engl J 
Med. 1994;331:1105-1109.
 12. Hambly PR, Dutton RP. Excess mortality associated with the use of a rapid 
infusion system at a level 1 trauma center. Resuscitation. 1996;31:127-133.
 13. Hoornweg LL, Storm-Versloot MN, Ubbink DT, et al. Meta analysis on mor-
tality of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2008;35:558-570.
 14. Reimerink JJ, Hoornweg LL, Vahl AC, et al. Endovascular repair versus open 
repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms: a multicenter randomized 
controlled trial. Ann Surg. 2013;258:248-256.
 15. Desgranges P, Kobeiter H, Katsahian S, et al. Editor’s choice - ECAR (En-
dovasculaire ou Chirurgie dans les Anevrysmes aorto-iliaques Rompus): 
a French randomized controlled trial of endovascular versus open surgi-
cal repair of ruptured aorto-iliac aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2015;50:303-310.
 16. IMPROVE Trial Investigators. Comparative clinical effectiveness and cost 
effectiveness of endovascular strategy v open repair for ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm: three year results of the IMPROVE randomised trial. BMJ. 
2017;359:j4859.
 17 . Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al. Five-year survival follow-
ing endovascular repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms is improv-
ing. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:105-113.e4.
 18. Baderkhan H, Goncalves FM, Oliveira NG, et al. Challenging anatomy pre-
dicts mortality and complications after endovascular treatment of ruptured 
abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Endovasc Ther. 2016;23:919-927 .
 19. Zarkowsky DS, Sorber R, Ramirez JL, et al. Aortic neck IFU violations dur-
ing EVAR for ruptured infrarenal aortic aneurysms are associated with in-
creased in-hospital mortality. Ann Vasc Surg. 2021;75:12-21.
 20. Runciman WB, Skowronski GA. Pathophysiology of haemorrhagic shock. 
Anaesth Intensive Care. 1984;12:193-205.
 21. Henry X, Verhaeghe P, Canarelli JP, et al. [General anesthesia in rabbits for 
digestive surgical research. A spontaneous ventilation technic by Nembutal-
diazepam combination]. J Chir (Paris). 1977;113:437-440.
 22. Hug CC Jr, McLeskey CH, Nahrwold ML, et al. Hemodynamic effects of 
propofol: data from over 25, 000 patients. Anesth Analg. 1993;77(suppl 
4):S21-S29.
 23. Crosby ET, Miller DR, Hamilton PP, et al. A randomized double-blind com-
parison of fentanyl- and sufentanil-oxygen anesthesia for abdominal aortic 
surgery. J Cardiothorac Anesth. 1990;4:168-176.
 24. Schneemilch CE, Schilling T, Bank U. Effects of general anaesthesia on 
inflammation. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol. 2004;18:493-507 .
 25. Lenhardt R. The effect of anesthesia on body temperature control. Front 
Biosci (Schol Ed). 2010;2:1145-1154.
6.5.5.3. Threshold for AAA Repair
 1. Lederle FA, Wilson SE, Johnson GR, et al. Immediate repair compared 
with surveillance of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J Med. 
2002;346:1437–1444.
 2. The UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants. Mortality results for randomised 
controlled trial of early elective surgery or ultrasonographic surveillance for 
small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Lancet. 1998;352:1649–1655.
 3. Powell JT, Brady AR, Brown LC, et al. Long-term outcomes of immediate 
repair compared with surveillance of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. N 
Engl J Med. 2002;346:1445–1452.
 4. Cao P, De Rango P, Verzini F, et al. Comparison of surveillance versus aor-
tic endografting for small aneurysm repair (CAESAR): results from a ran-
domised trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2011;41:13–25.
 5. Ouriel K, Clair DG, Kent KC, et al. Endovascular repair compared with sur-
veillance for patients with small abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2010;51:1081–1087 .
 6. Brown LC, Powell JT, et al. UK Small Aneurysm Trial Participants, Risk fac-
tors for aneurysm rupture in patients kept under ultrasound surveillance. 
Ann Surg. 1999;230:289–296; discussion 296–297 .
 7 . Soden PA, Zettervall SL, Ultee KH, et al. Outcomes for symptomatic ab-
dominal aortic aneurysms in the American College of Surgeons National 
Surgical Quality Improvement Program. J Vasc Surg. 2016;64:297–305.
 8. De Martino RR, Nolan BW, Goodney PP, et al. Outcomes of symptomatic 
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2010;52:5–12.e1.
 9. Karthaus EG, Tong TML, Vahl A, et al. Saccular abdominal aortic aneurysms: 
patient characteristics, clinical presentation, treatment, and outcomes in the 
Netherlands. Ann Surg. 2019;270:852–858.
 10. Brewster DC, Cronenwett JL, Hallett JW Jr, et al. Guidelines for the treat-
ment of abdominal aortic aneurysms. Report of a subcommittee of the Joint 
Council of the American Association for Vascular Surgery and Society for 
Vascular Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2003;37:1106–1117 .
 11. Sweeting MJ, Thompson SG, Brown LC, et al. Meta-analysis of individual 
patient data to examine factors affecting growth and rupture of small ab-
dominal aortic aneurysms. Br J Surg. 2012;99:655–665.
 12. Lo RC, Lu B, Fokkema MT, et al. Relative importance of aneurysm diameter 
and body size for predicting abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture in men and 
women. J Vasc Surg. 2014;59:1209–1216.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e462
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 13. Tambyraja AL, Raza Z, Stuart WP, et al. Does immediate operation for symp-
tomatic non-ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm compromise outcome? 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2004;28:543–546.
 14. Cambria RA, Gloviczki P, Stanson AW, et al. Symptomatic, nonruptured ab-
dominal aortic aneurysms: are emergent operations necessary? Ann Vasc 
Surg. 1994;8:121–126.
 15. Abdulrasak M, Sonesson BJ, Vaccarino R, et al. Endovascular aneurysm re-
pair for symptomatic abdominal aortic aneurysms has comparable results to 
elective repair in the long term. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:1927–1937 .e1921.
 16. Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The Society for Vascular Sur-
gery practice guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:2–77 .e72.
 17 . Tanaka A, Leonard SD, Sandhu HK, et al. Open descending and thoracoab-
dominal aortic repairs in patients younger than 50 years old. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2019;108:693–699.
 18. Ameli-Renani S, Das R, Morgan RA. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair for the 
treatment of aortic dissection: post-operative imaging, complications and 
secondary interventions. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2015;38:1391–1404.
6.5.5.4. Open Versus Endovascular Repair of AAA
 1. De Bruin JL, Baas AF, Buth J, et al. Long-term outcome of open or endovas-
cular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1881–
1889.
 2. Becquemin JP, Pillet JC, Lescalie F, et al. A randomized controlled trial of 
endovascular aneurysm repair versus open surgery for abdominal aortic 
aneurysms in low- to moderate-risk patients. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:1167–
1173.e1161.
 3. Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Outcomes following endo-
vascular vs open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a randomized trial. 
JAMA. 2009;302:1535–1542.
 4. Lederle FA, Freischlag JA, Kyriakides TC, et al. Long-term comparison of 
endovascular and open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:1988–1997 .
 5. Lederle FA, Kyriakides TC, Stroupe KT, et al. Open versus endovascular re-
pair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2126–2135.
 6. EVAR Trial Participants. Endovascular aneurysm repair versus open repair 
in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1): randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:2179–2186.
 7 . Greenhalgh RM, Brown LC, et al; United Kingdom EVAR Trial Investigators, 
Endovascular versus open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. N Engl J 
Med. 2010;362:1863–1871.
 8. Patel R, Sweeting MJ, Powell JT, et al. Endovascular versus open repair of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm in 15-years’ follow-up of the UK endovascular 
aneurysm repair trial 1 (EVAR trial 1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2016;388:2366–2374.
 9. Schermerhorn ML, O’Malley AJ, Jhaveri A, et al. Endovascular vs. open re-
pair of abdominal aortic aneurysms in the Medicare population. N Engl J 
Med. 2008;358:464–474.
 10. Varkevisser RRB, O’Donnell TFX, Swerdlow NJ, et al. Fenestrated endovas-
cular aneurysm repair is associated with lower perioperative morbidity and 
mortality compared with open repair for complex abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms. J Vasc Surg. 2019;69:1670–1678.
 11. Rao R, Lane TR, Franklin IJ, et al. Open repair versus fenestrated endovas-
cular aneurysm repair of juxtarenal aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2015;61:242–
255.
 12. Schanzer A, Greenberg RK, Hevelone N, et al. Predictors of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm sac enlargement after endovascular repair. Circulation. 
2011;123:2848–2855.
 13. Herman CR, Charbonneau P, Hongku K, et al. Any nonadherence to instruc-
tions for use predicts graft-related adverse events in patients undergoing 
elective endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:126–133.
 14. Antoniou GA, Juszczak MT, Nasr H, et al. Prognosis review and time-to-
event data meta-analysis of endovascular aneurysm repair outside ver-
sus within instructions for use of aortic endograft devices. J Vasc Surg. 
2020;71:1415–1431.e1415.
 15. Walker J, Tucker L Y, Goodney P, et al. Adherence to endovascular aortic 
aneurysm repair device instructions for use guidelines has no impact on 
outcomes. J Vasc Surg. 2015;61:1151–1159.
 16. Beckerman WE, Tadros RO, Faries PL, et al. No major difference in out-
comes for endovascular aneurysm repair stent grafts placed outside of in-
structions for use. J Vasc Surg. 2016;64:63–74.e62.
 17 . O’Donnell TFX, Boitano L T, Deery SE, et al. Open versus fenestrated en-
dovascular repair of complex abdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Surg. 
2020;271:969–977 .
 18. Jones AD, Waduud MA, Walker P, et al. Meta-analysis of fenestrated 
endovascular aneurysm repair versus open surgical repair of juxtare-
nal abdominal aortic aneurysms over the last 10 years. BJS Open. 
2019;3:572–584.
 19. Dubost C, Allary M, Oeconomos N. Resection of an aneurysm of the ab-
dominal aorta: reestablishment of the continuity by a preserved human 
arterial graft, with result after five months. AMA Arch Surg. 1952;64: 
405–408.
 20. Varkevisser RRB, Swerdlow NJ, de Guerre L, et al. Five-year survival follow-
ing endovascular repair of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms is improv-
ing. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:105–113.e4.
 21. Li B, Khan S, Salata K, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
long-term outcomes of endovascular versus open repair of abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2019;70:954–969.e930.
 22. Antoniou GA, Antoniou SA, Torella F. Editor’s choice-endovascular vs. open 
repair for abdominal aortic aneurysm: systematic review and meta-analysis 
of updated peri-operative and long term data of randomised controlled trials. 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;59:385–397 .
 23. Brown LC, Epstein D, Manca A, et al. The UK Endovascular Aneurysm Re-
pair (EVAR) trials: design, methodology and progress. Eur J Vasc Endovasc 
Surg. 2004;27:372–381.
 24. EVAR trial participants. Endovascular aneurysm repair and outcome in pa-
tients unfit for open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 2): 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:2187–2192.
 25. Sweeting MJ, Patel R, Powell JT, et al. Endovascular repair of abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm in patients physically ineligible for open repair: very 
long-term follow-up in the EVAR-2 randomized controlled trial. Ann Surg. 
2017;266:713–719.
 26. Adkar SS, Turner MC, Leraas HJ, et al. Low mortality rates after en-
dovascular aortic repair expand use to high-risk patients. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;67:424–432.e421.
 27 . Bertges DJ, Neal D, Schanzer A, et al. The Vascular Quality Initiative Cardiac 
Risk Index for prediction of myocardial infarction after vascular surgery. J 
Vasc Surg. 2016;64:1411–1421.e4.
 28. Eslami MH, Rybin D, Doros G, et al. Comparison of a Vascular Study Group 
of New England risk prediction model with established risk prediction mod-
els of in-hospital mortality after elective abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J 
Vasc Surg. 2015;62:1125–1133.e1122.
 29. Eslami MH, Rybin DV, Doros G, et al. External validation of Vascular Study 
Group of New England risk predictive model of mortality after elective ab-
dominal aorta aneurysm repair in the Vascular Quality Initiative and compari-
son against established models. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:143–150.
6.5.5.5. Treatment of Concomitant Common Iliac Aneurysms
 1. Richards T, Dharmadasa A, Davies R, et al. Natural history of the common 
iliac artery in the presence of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 
2009;49:881–885.
 2. Armon MP, Wenham PW, Whitaker SC, et al. Common iliac artery aneurysms 
in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
1998;15:255–257 .
 3. Jalalzadeh H, Indrakusuma R, Koelemay MJW, et al. Editor’s choice - na-
tionwide analysis of patients undergoing iliac artery aneurysm repair in the 
Netherlands. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:49–55.
 4. Gibello L, Varetto G, Ruffino MA, et al. Long term outcomes of endovascular 
aortic repair in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm and ectatic common 
iliac arteries. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:356–364.
 5. Kouvelos GN, Katsargyris A, Antoniou GA, et al. Outcome after interruption 
or preservation of internal iliac artery flow during endovascular repair of 
abdominal aorto-iliac aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;52:621–
634.
 6. Bosanquet DC, Wilcox C, Whitehurst L, et al. Systematic review and meta-
analysis of the effect of internal iliac artery exclusion for patients undergo-
ing EVAR. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2017;53:534–548.
 7 . Laine MT, Bjorck M, Beiles CB, et al. Few internal iliac artery aneurysms 
rupture under 4 cm. J Vasc Surg. 2017;65:76–81.
 8. Huang Y, Gloviczki P, Duncan AA, et al. Common iliac artery aneurysm: ex-
pansion rate and results of open surgical and endovascular repair. J Vasc 
Surg. 2008;47:1203–1210; discussion 1210–1211.
 9. Sala F, Hassen-Khodja R, Branchereau P, et al. Outcome of common iliac 
arteries after aortoaortic graft placement during elective repair of infrarenal 
abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2002;36:982–987 .
 10. Hassen-Khodja R, Feugier P, Favre JP, et al. Outcome of common iliac 
arteries after straight aortic tube-graft placement during elective repair of 
infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44:943–948.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e463
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
6.5.6.1. Surveillance After TAA Repair
 1. Meena RA, Benarroch-Gampel J, Leshnower BG, et al. Surveillance recom-
mendations after thoracic endovascular aortic repair should be based on 
initial indication for repair. Ann Vasc Surg. 2019;57:51–59.
 2. Bavaria JE, Appoo JJ, Makaroun MS, et al. Endovascular stent grafting 
versus open surgical repair of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms in 
low-risk patients: a multicenter comparative trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;133:369–377 .
 3. Ranney DN, Cox ML, Y erokun BA, et al. Long-term results of endo-
vascular repair for descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;67:363–368.
 4. von Allmen RS, Anjum A, Powell JT. Outcomes after endovascular or open 
repair for degenerative descending thoracic aortic aneurysm using linked 
hospital data. Br J Surg. 2014;101:1244–1251.
 5. Roselli EE, Subramanian S, Sun Z, et al. Endovascular versus open elephant 
trunk completion for extensive aortic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;146:1408–1416; discussion 1416–1417 .
 6. Daye D, Walker TG. Complications of endovascular aneurysm repair of the 
thoracic and abdominal aorta: evaluation and management. Cardiovasc Di-
agn Ther. 2018;8:S138–S156.
 7 . Ameli-Renani S, Das R, Morgan RA. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair for 
the treatment of aortic dissection: post-operative imaging, complications 
and secondary interventions. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2015;38:1391–
1404.
 8. Hellinger JC. Endovascular repair of thoracic and abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms: pre- and postprocedural imaging. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol. 2005;8:2–
15.
 9. Weigel S, Tombach B, Maintz D, et al. Thoracic aortic stent graft: comparison 
of contrast-enhanced MR angiography and CT angiography in the follow-
up: initial results. Eur Radiol. 2003;13:1628–1634.
 10. Tanaka A, Leonard SD, Sandhu HK, et al. Open descending and thoracoab-
dominal aortic repairs in patients younger than 50 years old. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2019;108:693–699.
 11. Schaffer JM, Lingala B, Fischbein MP, et al. Midterm Outcomes of Open 
Descending Thoracic Aortic Repair in More Than 5, 000 Medicare Patients. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2015;100:2087–2094; discussion 2094.
 12. Sadek M, Abjigitova D, Pellet Y, et al. Operative outcomes after open repair 
of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms in the era of endovascular surgery. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;97:1562–1567 .
 13. Peterss S, Charilaou P, Dumfarth J, et al. Aortic valve disease with ascend-
ing aortic aneurysm: Impact of concomitant root-sparing (supracoronary) 
aortic replacement in nonsyndromic patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;152:791–798.e1.
 14. Gaudino M, Lau C, Munjal M, et al. Contemporary outcomes of surgery 
for aortic root aneurysms: a propensity-matched comparison of valve-
sparing and composite valve graft replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;150:1120–1129.e1.
 15. Wang TKM, Desai MY. Thoracic aortic aneurysm: optimal surveillance and 
treatment. Cleve Clin J Med. 2020;87:557–568.
 16. Groner LK, Lau C, Devereux RB, et al. Imaging of the postsurgical aorta in 
Marfan syndrome. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2018;20:80.
 17 . Makaroun MS, Dillavou ED, Wheatley GH, et al. Five-year results of endo-
vascular treatment with the Gore TAG device compared with open repair of 
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:912–918.
 18. Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of long-term use of antihyper-
tensive medications with late outcomes among patients with aortic dissec-
tion. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4:e210469.
 19. Hill RA. Do short-term changes in white matter structure indicate learning-
induced myelin plasticity? J Neurosci. 2013;33:19393–19395.
6.5.6.2. Surveillance After AAA Repair
 1. Sternbergh WC 3rd, Greenberg RK, Chuter TA, et al. Redefining postop-
erative surveillance after endovascular aneurysm repair: recommendations 
based on 5-year follow-up in the US Zenith multicenter trial. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:278–284; discussion 84–85.
 2. Go AS, Magid DJ, Wells B, et al. The cardiovascular research network: a new 
paradigm for cardiovascular quality and outcomes research. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes. 2008;1:138–147 .
 3. Schermerhorn ML, Buck DB, O’Malley AJ, et al. Long-Term Outcomes of 
Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm in the Medicare Population. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:328–338.
 4. Go MR, Barbato JE, Rhee RY, et al. What is the clinical utility of a 6-month 
computed tomography in the follow-up of endovascular aneurysm repair 
patients? J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:1181–1186; discussion 1186–1187 .
 5. Mii S, Mori A, Sakata H, et al. Para-anastomotic aneurysms: incidence, risk 
factors, treatment and prognosis. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 1998;39:259–
266.
 6. Edwards JM, Teefey SA, Zierler RE, et al. Intraabdominal paraanastomotic 
aneurysms after aortic bypass grafting. J Vasc Surg. 1992;15:344–350; 
discussion 351–353.
 7 . Fransen GA, Desgranges P, Laheij RJ, et al. Frequency, predictive factors, 
and consequences of stent-graft kink following endovascular AAA repair. J 
Endovasc Ther. 2003;10:913–918.
 8. Tonnessen BH, Sternbergh WC 3rd, Money SR. Mid- and long-term device 
migration after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: a compari-
son of AneuRx and Zenith endografts. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:392–400; 
discussion 400–401.
 9. Iscan HZ, Unal EU, Akkaya B, et al. Color Doppler ultrasound for surveil-
lance following EVAR as the primary tool. J Card Surg. 2021;36:111–117 .
 10. Swerdlow NJ, McCallum JC, Liang P, et al. Select type I and type III endole-
aks at the completion of fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair resolve 
spontaneously. J Vasc Surg. 2019;70:381–390.
 11. Tran K, McFarland G, Sgroi M, et al. Duplex ultrasound surveillance of renal 
branch grafts after fenestrated endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;70:1048–1055.
 12. Noll RE Jr, Tonnessen BH, Mannava K, et al. Long-term postplacement 
cost after endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:9–15, dis-
cussion 15.
 13. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography--an increasing source of radia-
tion exposure. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2277–2284.
 14. Johnsen L, Hisdal J, Jonung T, et al. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound detects 
type II endoleaks during follow-up for endovascular aneurysm repair. J Vasc 
Surg. 2020;72:1952–1959.
 15. George J, Tadros RO, Rao A, et al. Duplex ultrasound can successfully 
identify endoleaks and renovisceral stent patency in patients undergo-
ing complex endovascular aneurysm repair. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 
2021;55:234–238.
 16. Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of noncontrast magnetic reso-
nance angiography for aneurysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks after 
endovascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol. 2021;22:513–524.
 17 . Allen RC, Schneider J, Longenecker L, et al. Paraanastomotic aneurysms 
of the abdominal aorta. J Vasc Surg. 1993;18:424–431; discussion 431–
432.
 18. Conrad MF, Crawford RS, Pedraza JD, et al. Long-term durability of open 
abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2007;46:669–675.
 19. Dingemans SA, Jonker FH, Moll FL, et al. Aneurysm sac enlargement 
after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2016;31:229–238.
 20. Candell L, Tucker L Y, Goodney P, et al. Early and delayed rupture after endo-
vascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in a 10-year multicenter registry. 
J Vasc Surg. 2014;60:1146–1153.
 21. Zierler RE. Duplex ultrasound follow-up after fenestrated and branched 
endovascular aneurysm repair (FEVAR and BEVAR). Semin Vasc Surg. 
2020;33:60–64.
 22. Chaikof EL, Dalman RL, Eskandari MK, et al. The Society for Vascular Sur-
gery practice guidelines on the care of patients with an abdominal aortic 
aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:2–77 .e72.
7 .1. Presentation
 1. Meszaros I, Morocz J, Szlavi J, et al. Epidemiology and clinicopathology of 
aortic dissection. Chest. 2000;117:1271–1278.
 2. Evangelista A, Isselbacher EM, Bossone E, et al. Insights from the Interna-
tional Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection: a 20-year experience of collab-
orative clinical research. Circulation. 2018;137:1846–1860.
 3. Bossone E, Pyeritz RE, O’Gara P, et al. Acute aortic dissection in blacks: 
insights from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. Am J 
Med. 2013;126:909–915.
 4. Bossone E, LaBounty TM, Eagle KA. Acute aortic syndromes: diagnosis and 
management, an update. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:739d–749d.
 5. Nienaber CA, Fattori R, Mehta RH, et al. Gender-related differences in acute 
aortic dissection. Circulation. 2004;109:3014–3021.
7 .2. AAS: Diagnostic Evaluation (Imaging, Laboratory Testing)
 1. Bhave NM, Nienaber CA, Clough RE, et al. Multimodality imaging of thoracic 
aortic diseases in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:902–919.
 2. Strayer RJ, Shearer PL, Hermann LK. Screening, evaluation, and ear -
ly management of acute aortic dissection in the ED. Curr Cardiol Rev. 
2012;8:152–157 .
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e464
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 3. Shiga T, Wajima Z, Apfel CC, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of transesophageal 
echocardiography, helical computed tomography, and magnetic resonance 
imaging for suspected thoracic aortic dissection: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:1350–1356.
 4. Diercks DB, Promes SB, Schuur JD, et al. Clinical policy: critical issues in 
the evaluation and management of adult patients with suspected acute non-
traumatic thoracic aortic dissection. Ann Emerg Med. 2015;65:32–42.e12.
 5. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 6. Kicska GA, Hurwitz Koweek LM, et al. Expert Panel on Cardiac Imaging, 
ACR Appropriateness Criteria® Suspected Acute Aortic Syndrome. J Am 
Coll Radiol. 2021;18:S474–S481.
 7 . Nazerian P, Pivetta E, Veglia S, et al. Integrated use of conventional chest ra-
diography cannot rule out acute aortic syndromes in emergency department 
patients at low clinical probability. Acad Emerg Med. 2019;26:1255–1265.
 8. Svensson LG, Labib SB, Eisenhauer AC, et al. Intimal tear without hemato-
ma: an important variant of aortic dissection that can elude current imaging 
techniques. Circulation. 1999;99:1331–1336.
 9. Bima P, Pivetta E, Nazerian P, et al. Systematic review of aortic dissection 
detection risk score plus D-dimer for diagnostic rule-out of suspected acute 
aortic syndromes. Acad Emerg Med. 2020;27:1013–1027 .
 10. Hiestand BC, Ohle R, Anjum O, et al. What is the specificity of the aortic 
dissection detection risk score in a low-prevalence population? Acad Emerg 
Med. 2019;26:632–638.
 11. Morello F, Bima P, Pivetta E, et al. Development and validation of a simpli-
fied probability assessment score integrated with age-adjusted d-Dimer for 
diagnosis of acute aortic syndromes. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e018425.
 12. Suzuki T, Distante A, Zizza A, et al. Diagnosis of acute aortic dissection by 
D-dimer: the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection Substudy on 
Biomarkers (IRAD-Bio) experience. Circulation. 2009;119:2702–2707 .
 13. Nazerian P, Mueller C, de Matos Soeiro A, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 
the aortic dissection detection risk score plus D-dimer for acute aor-
tic syndromes: the ADvISED prospective multicenter study. Circulation. 
2018;137:250–258.
 14. Rogers AM, Hermann LK, Booher AM, et al. Sensitivity of the aortic dissec-
tion detection risk score, a novel guideline-based tool for identification of 
acute aortic dissection at initial presentation: results from the international 
registry of acute aortic dissection. Circulation. 2011;123:2213–2218.
7 .3.1. Acute Medical Management of AAS
 1. Jonker FH, Trimarchi S, Rampoldi V, et al. Aortic expansion after acute type 
B aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:1223–1229.
 2. Suzuki T, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. T ype-selective benefits of 
medications in treatment of acute aortic dissection (from the International 
Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection [IRAD]). Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:122–
127 .
 3. Kumar KU, Zhao Q, Bai X, et al. Controlled heart rate and blood pressure 
reduce the life threatening aortic events and increase survival in patients 
with type B aortic dissection: a single center experience. Int J Cardiol Heart 
Vasc. 2015;8:73–74.
 4. Wang Z, Ge M, Chen T, et al. Impact of hypertension on short- and long-term 
survival of patients who underwent emergency surgery for type A acute 
aortic dissection. J Thorac Dis. 2020;12:6618–6628.
 5. Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of long-term use of antihyper-
tensive medications with late outcomes among patients with aortic dissec-
tion. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4:e210469.
 6. Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular repair compared with medical 
management of patients with uncomplicated type B acute aortic dissection. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2835–2842.
 7 . Grubb BP, Sirio C, Zelis R. Intravenous labetalol in acute aortic dissection. 
JAMA. 1987;258:78–79.
 8. Ulici A, Jancik J, Lam TS, et al. Clevidipine versus sodium nitroprusside 
in acute aortic dissection: a retrospective chart review. Am J Emerg Med. 
2017;35:1514–1518.
 9. Fattori R, Cao P, De Rango P, et al. Interdisciplinary expert consensus 
document on management of type B aortic dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1661–1678.
 10. Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular Repair Compared With Medical 
Management of Patients With Uncomplicated T ype B Acute Aortic Dissec-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2835–2842.
 11. Lu N, Ma X, Xu T, et al. Optimal blood pressure control for patients after tho-
racic endovascular aortic repair of type B aortic dissection. BMC Cardiovasc 
Disord. 2019;19:124.
 12. Masaki N, Kumagai K, Sasaki K, et al. Suppressive effect of pitavastatin on 
aortic arch dilatation in acute Stanford type B aortic dissection: analysis of 
STANP trial. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;66:334–343.
7 .3.2. Subsequent Medical Management of AAS
 1. Suzuki T, Isselbacher EM, Nienaber CA, et al. T ype-selective benefits of 
medications in treatment of acute aortic dissection (from the International 
Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection [IRAD]). Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:122–
127 .
 2. Lu N, Ma X, Xu T, et al. Optimal blood pressure control for patients after tho-
racic endovascular aortic repair of type B aortic dissection. BMC Cardiovasc 
Disord. 2019;19:124.
 3. Wang Z, Ge M, Chen T, et al. Impact of hypertension on short- and long-term 
survival of patients who underwent emergency surgery for type A acute 
aortic dissection. J Thorac Dis. 2020;12:6618–6628.
 4. Chen SW, Chan YH, Lin CP, et al. Association of long-term use of antihyper-
tensive medications with late outcomes among patients with aortic dissec-
tion. JAMA Netw Open. 2021;4:e210469.
 5. Fattori R, Cao P, De Rango P, et al. Interdisciplinary expert consensus 
document on management of type B aortic dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1661–1678.
 6. Kumar KU, Zhao Q, Bai X, et al. Controlled heart rate and blood pressure 
reduce the life threatening aortic events and increase survival in patients 
with type B aortic dissection: a single center experience. Int J Cardiol Heart 
Vasc. 2015;8:73–74.
 7 . Qin YL, Wang F, Li TX, et al. Endovascular Repair Compared With Medical 
Management of Patients With Uncomplicated T ype B Acute Aortic Dissec-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:2835–2842.
 8. Doyle JJ, Doyle AJ, Wilson NK, et al. A deleterious gene-by-environment 
interaction imposed by calcium channel blockers in Marfan syndrome. Elife. 
2015;4:e08648.
7 .4.1.1. Initial Surgical Considerations in Acute Type A Aortic 
Dissection
 1. Hagan PG, Nienaber CA, Isselbacher EM, et al. The International Registry 
of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD): new insights into an old disease. JAMA. 
2000;283:897–903.
 2. Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presentation, diagnosis, and out-
comes of acute aortic dissection: 17-year trends from the International Reg-
istry of Acute Aortic Dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:350–358.
 3. Goldstone AB, Chiu P, Baiocchi M, et al. Interfacility transfer of Medicare 
beneficiaries with acute type A aortic dissection and regionalization of care 
in the United States. Circulation. 2019;140:1239–1250.
 4. Umana-Pizano JB, Nissen AP, Sandhu HK, et al. Acute type A dissection re-
pair by high-volume vs low-volume surgeons at a high-volume aortic center. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;108:1330–1336.
 5. Di Eusanio M, Patel HJ, Nienaber CA, et al. Patients with type A acute aortic 
dissection presenting with major brain injury: should we operate on them? J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:S213–S221.e1.
 6. Estrera AL, Garami Z, Miller CC, et al. Acute type A aortic dissection com-
plicated by stroke: can immediate repair be performed safely? J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2006;132:1404–1408.
 7 . Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk models to predict surgi-
cal mortality in acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of 
Acute Aortic Dissection score. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:55–61.
 8. Trimarchi S, Nienaber CA, Rampoldi V, et al. Contemporary results of surgery 
in acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of Acute Aortic 
Dissection Experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;129:112–122.
 9. Long SM, Tribble CG, Raymond DP, et al. Preoperative shock determines 
outcome for acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:520–
524.
 10. Hattori S, Noguchi K, Gunji Y, et al. Acute type A aortic dissection in non-
agenarians: to cut or not. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2020;31:102–
1 07.
 11. Biancari F, Vasques F, Benenati V, et al. Contemporary results after surgical 
repair of type A aortic dissection in patients aged 80 years and older: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40:1058–
1063.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e465
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 12. Kawahito K, Kimura N, Yamaguchi A, et al. Early and late surgical out-
comes of acute type A aortic dissection in octogenarians. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;105:137–143.
 13. Suzuki T, Asai T, Kinoshita T. Emergency surgery for acute type A aortic 
dissection in octogenarians without patient selection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2019;107:1146–1153.
 14. Zindovic I, Sjogren J, Bjursten H, et al. Impact of hemodynamic instability 
and organ malperfusion in elderly surgical patients treated for acute type A 
aortic dissection. J Card Surg. 2015;30:822–829.
 15. Braverman AC. Acute aortic dissection: clinician update. Circulation. 
2010;122:184–188.
 16. Matthews CR, Madison M, Timsina LR, et al. Impact of time between diagno-
sis to treatment in acute type A aortic dissection. Sci Rep. 2021;11:3519.
 17 . Qiu J, Zhang L, Luo X, et al. Higher mortality in patients undergoing night-
time surgical procedures for acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;106:1164–1170.
 18. Ahlsson A, Wickbom A, Geirsson A, et al. Is there a weekend effect in sur-
gery for type A dissection?: results from the Nordic Consortium for Acute 
type A Aortic Dissection database. Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;108:770–776.
 19. Gokalp O, Yilik L, Besir Y, et al. “Overtime hours effect” on emergen-
cy surgery of acute type A aortic dissection. Braz J Cardiovasc Surg. 
2019;34:680–686.
 20. Gasser S, Stastny L, Kofler M, et al. Surgery out of office hours for type A 
aortic dissection: does night-time and weekend surgery worsen outcome? 
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2020;31:806–812.
 21. Sultan I, Bianco V, Patel HJ, et al. Surgery for type A aortic dissection in pa-
tients with cerebral malperfusion: results from the International Registry of 
Acute Aortic Dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;161:1713–1720.e1.
 22. Tsukube T, Hayashi T, Kawahira T, et al. Neurological outcomes after imme-
diate aortic repair for acute type A aortic dissection complicated by coma. 
Circulation. 2011;124:S163–S167 .
 23. Chiu P, Rotto T J, Goldstone AB, et al. Time-to-operation does not predict 
outcome in acute type A aortic dissection complicated by neurologic injury 
at presentation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;158:665–672.
 24. Berretta P, Trimarchi S, Patel HJ, et al. Malperfusion syndromes in type A 
aortic dissection: what we have learned from IRAD. J Vis Surg. 2018;4:65.
 25. Fukuhara S, Norton EL, Chaudhary N, et al. T ype A aortic dissection with 
cerebral malperfusion: new insights. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;112:501–509.
7 .4.1.2. Management of Malperfusion
 1. Berretta P, Trimarchi S, Patel HJ, et al. Malperfusion syndromes in type A 
aortic dissection: what we have learned from IRAD. J Vis Surg. 2018;4:65.
 2. Geirsson A, Szeto WY, Pochettino A, et al. Significance of malperfusion 
syndromes prior to contemporary surgical repair for acute type A dissec-
tion: outcomes and need for additional revascularizations. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2007;32:255–262.
 3. Leshnower BG, Keeling WB, Duwayri YM, et al. The “thoracic endovascular 
aortic repair-first” strategy for acute type A dissection with mesenteric mal-
perfusion: Initial results compared with conventional algorithms. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;158:1516–1524.
 4. Yang B, Rosati CM, Norton EL, et al. Endovascular fenestration/stenting 
first followed by delayed open aortic repair for acute type A aortic dissection 
with malperfusion syndrome. Circulation. 2018;138:2091–2103.
 5. Yang B, Norton EL, Rosati CM, et al. Managing patients with acute type A 
aortic dissection and mesenteric malperfusion syndrome: a 20-year experi-
ence. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;158:675–687 .e4.
 6. Lawton JS, Moon MR, Liu J, et al. The profound impact of combined severe 
acidosis and malperfusion on operative mortality in the surgical treatment of 
type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;155:897–904.
 7 . Zindovic I, Gudbjartsson T, Ahlsson A, et al. Malperfusion in acute type A 
aortic dissection: an update from the Nordic Consortium for Acute T ype A 
Aortic Dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:1324–1333.e1326.
 8. Uchida K, Karube N, Kasama K, et al. Early reperfusion strategy improves 
the outcomes of surgery for type A acute aortic dissection with malperfu-
sion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:483–489.
 9. Kawahito K, Kimura N, Yamaguchi A, et al. Malperfusion in type A aortic dis-
section: results of emergency central aortic repair. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2019;67:594–601.
 10. Evangelista A, Isselbacher EM, Bossone E, et al. Insights from the Interna-
tional Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection: a 20-year experience of collab-
orative clinical research. Circulation. 2018;137:1846–1860.
 11. Yamashiro S, Arakaki R, Kise Y, et al. Management of visceral malperfusion 
complicated with acute type A aortic dissection. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac 
Surg. 2015;21:346–351.
7 .4.1.3. Surgical Repair Strategies in Acute Type A Aortic 
Dissection
 1. Hysi I, Juthier F, Fabre O, et al. Aortic root surgery improves long-term sur-
vival after acute type A aortic dissection. Int J Cardiol. 2015;184:285–290.
 2. Peterss S, Dumfarth J, Rizzo JA, et al. Sparing the aortic root in acute aortic 
dissection type A: risk reduction and restored integrity of the untouched 
root. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;50:232–239.
 3. Chen SK, Qiu ZH, Fang GH, et al. Reported outcomes after aortic valve 
resuspension for acute type A aortic dissection: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2019;29:331–338.
 4. Saczkowski R, Malas T, Mesana T, et al. Aortic valve preservation and repair 
in acute type A aortic dissection. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014;45:e220–
e226.
 5. Qiu J, Wu J, Xie E, et al. Surgical management and outcomes of the aortic 
root in acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 2020;110:136–
143.
 6. Vendramin I, Lechiancole A, Piani D, et al. T ype A acute aortic dissection with 
≥40-mm aortic root: results of conservative and replacement strategies at 
long-term follow-up. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2021;59:1115–1122.
 7 . Di Eusanio M, Trimarchi S, Peterson MD, et al. Root replacement surgery 
versus more conservative management during type A acute aortic dissec-
tion repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98:2078–2084.
 8. Yang B, Norton EL, Hobbs R, et al. Short- and long-term outcomes of aor-
tic root repair and replacement in patients undergoing acute type A aor-
tic dissection repair: twenty-year experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2019;157:2125–2136.
 9. Malaisrie SC, Szeto WY, Halas M, et al. 2021 The American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery expert consensus document: surgical treatment of acute 
type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;162:735–758.e2.
 10. Beckmann E, Martens A, Pertz J, et al. Valve-sparing David I procedure in 
acute aortic type A dissection: a 20-year experience with more than 100 
patients. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;52:319–324.
 11. Mosbahi S, Stak D, Gravestock I, et al. A systemic review and meta-analysis: 
Bentall versus David procedure in acute type A aortic dissection. Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg. 2019;55:201–209.
 12. Geirsson A, Shioda K, Olsson C, et al. Differential outcomes of open and 
clamp-on distal anastomosis techniques in acute type A aortic dissection. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;157:1750–1758.
 13. Malvindi PG, Modi A, Miskolczi S, et al. Open and closed distal anastomosis 
for acute type A aortic dissection repair. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 
2016;22:776–783.
 14. Lawton JS, Liu J, Kulshrestha K, et al. The impact of surgical strategy on 
survival after repair of type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;150:294–301.e291.
 15. Rampoldi V, Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, et al. Simple risk models to predict surgi-
cal mortality in acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of 
Acute Aortic Dissection score. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:55–61.
 16. Hsieh WC, Kan CD, Yu HC, et al. Ascending aorta replacement vs. total 
aortic arch replacement in the treatment of acute type A dissection: a meta-
analysis. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2019;23:9590–9611.
 17 . Poon SS, Theologou T, Harrington D, et al. Hemiarch versus total aortic 
arch replacement in acute type A dissection: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;5:156–173.
 18. Yan Y, Xu L, Zhang H, et al. Proximal aortic repair versus extensive aortic 
repair in the treatment of acute type A aortic dissection: a meta-analysis. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49:1392–1401.
 19. Preventza O, Cervera R, Cooley DA, et al. Acute type I aortic dissection: tra-
ditional versus hybrid repair with antegrade stent delivery to the descending 
thoracic aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:119–125.
 20. Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, Bakaeen FG, et al. Evolution of Simplified Frozen El-
ephant Trunk Repair for Acute DeBakey T ype I Dissection: Midterm Out-
comes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018;105:749–755.
 21. Benedetto U, Mohamed H, Vitulli P, et al. Axillary versus femoral arterial 
cannulation in type A acute aortic dissection: evidence from a meta-analysis 
of comparative studies and adjusted risk estimates. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2015;48:953–959.
 22. Ren Z, Wang Z, Hu R, et al. Which cannulation (axillary cannulation or femo-
ral cannulation) is better for acute type A aortic dissection repair? A meta-
analysis of nine clinical studies. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;47:408– 
415.
 23. Wiedemann D, Kocher A, Dorfmeister M, et al. Effect of cerebral protection 
strategy on outcome of patients with Stanford type A aortic dissection. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;146:647–655.e641.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e466
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 24. Preventza O, Simpson KH, Cooley DA, et al. Unilateral versus bilateral 
cerebral perfusion for acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2015;99:80–87 .
 25. Samanidis G, Kanakis M, Khoury M, et al. Antegrade and retrograde cerebral 
perfusion during acute type A aortic dissection repair in 290 patients. Heart 
Lung Circ. 2021;30:1075–1083.
 26. Jormalainen M, Raivio P, Mustonen C, et al. Direct Aortic Versus Peripheral 
Arterial Cannulation in Surgery for T ype A Aortic Dissection. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2020;110:1251–1258.
 27 . Kreibich M, Chen Z, Rylski B, et al. Outcome after aortic, axillary, or femoral 
cannulation for acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2019;158:27–34.e29.
 28. Preventza O, Bakaeen FG, Stephens EH, et al. Innominate artery cannu-
lation: an alternative to femoral or axillary cannulation for arterial inflow 
in proximal aortic surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:S191– 
S196.
 29. Reece TB, Tribble CG, Smith RL, et al. Central cannulation is safe in acute 
aortic dissection repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133:428–434.
 30. Khaladj N, Shrestha M, Peterss S, et al. Ascending aortic cannulation in 
acute aortic dissection type A: the Hannover experience. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2008;34:792–796; discussion 796.
 31. Frederick JR, Yang E, Trubelja A, et al. Ascending aortic cannulation in acute 
type A dissection repair. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95:1808–1811.
 32. Zierer A, Voeller RK, Hill KE, et al. Aortic enlargement and late reop-
eration after repair of acute type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2007;84:479–486; discussion 486–487 .
 33. Wu J, Huang Y, Qiu J, et al. Is valve-sparing root replacement a safe option 
in acute type A aortic dissection? A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2019;29:766–775.
 34. Moon MR, Sundt TM 3rd, Pasque MK, et al. Does the extent of proximal or 
distal resection influence outcome for type A dissections? Ann Thorac Surg. 
2001;71:1244–1249; discussion 1249–1250.
 35. Preventza O, Olive JK, Liao JL, et al. Acute type I aortic dissection with or 
without antegrade stent delivery: mid-term outcomes. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2019;158:1273–1281.
 36. Takagi H, Umemoto T. A meta-analysis of total arch replacement with frozen 
elephant trunk in acute type A aortic dissection. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 
2016;50:33–46.
 37 . Vallabhajosyula P, Szeto WY, Pulsipher A, et al. Antegrade thoracic stent 
grafting during repair of acute Debakey type I dissection promotes distal 
aortic remodeling and reduces late open distal reoperation rate. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;147:942–948.
 38. Chen LW, Lu L, Dai XF, et al. Total arch repair with open triple-branched stent 
graft placement for acute type A aortic dissection: experience with 122 
patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:521–528.
 39. Rylski B, Perez M, Beyersdorf F, et al. Acute non-A non-B aortic dissection: 
incidence, treatment and outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2017;52:1111–
1117 .
 40. Takagi H, Umemoto T. A Meta-Analysis of the Association of Chronic Ob-
structive Pulmonary Disease with Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Presence. 
Ann Vasc Surg. 2016;34:84–94.
 41. Chiu P, Trojan J, Tsou S, et al. Limited root repair in acute type A aortic dis-
section is safe but results in increased risk of reoperation. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1–7 .e1.
 42. Halstead JC, Spielvogel D, Meier DM, et al. Composite aortic root replace-
ment in acute type A dissection: time to rethink the indications? Eur J Car-
diothorac Surg. 2005;27:626–632; discussion 632–633.
 43.  Geirsson A, Szeto WY, Pochettino A, et al. Significance of malperfusion 
syndromes prior to contemporary surgical repair for acute type A dissec-
tion: outcomes and need for additional revascularizations. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2007;32:255–262.
 44. Castrovinci S, Pacini D, Di Marco L, et al. Surgical management of aortic 
root in type A acute aortic dissection: a propensity-score analysis. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;50:223–229.
 45. Nishida H, Tabata M, Fukui T, et al. Surgical strategy and outcome for aortic 
root in patients undergoing repair of acute type A aortic dissection. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2016;101:1464–1469.
 46. Ergin MA, McCullough J, Galla JD, et al. Radical replacement of the aortic 
root in acute type A dissection: indications and outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 1996;10:840–844; discussion 845.
 47 . Fichadiya A, Gregory AJ, Kotha VK, et al. Extended-arch repair for acute 
type-A aortic dissection: perioperative and mid-term results. Eur J Cardio-
thorac Surg. 2019;56:714–721.
 48. Kazui T, Yamashita K, Washiyama N, et al. Impact of an aggressive surgical 
approach on surgical outcome in type A aortic dissection. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2002;74:S1844–S1847;discussion S1857–S1863.
 49. Easo J, Weigang E, Holzl PP, et al. Influence of operative strategy for the 
aortic arch in DeBakey type I aortic dissection: analysis of the German 
Registry for Acute Aortic Dissection T ype A. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;144:617–623.
 50. Helder MRK, Schaff HV, Day CN, et al. Regional and temporal trends in the 
outcomes of repairs for acute type A aortic dissections. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2020;109:26–33.
 51. Lin HH, Liao SF, Wu CF, et al. Outcome of frozen elephant trunk technique 
for acute type A aortic dissection: as systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94:e694.
 52. Smith HN, Boodhwani M, Ouzounian M, et al. Classification and outcomes of 
extended arch repair for acute type A aortic dissection: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2017;24:450–459.
 53. Preventza O, Liao JL, Olive JK, et al. Neurologic complications after the fro-
zen elephant trunk procedure: a meta-analysis of more than 3000 patients. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;160:20–33.e4.
 54. Tong G, Zhang B, Zhou X, et al. Bilateral versus unilateral antegrade cere-
bral perfusion in total arch replacement for type A aortic dissection. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;154:767–775.
 55. Liu Z, Wang C, Zhang X, et al. Effect of different types of cerebral perfusion 
for acute type A aortic dissection undergoing aortic arch procedure, unilat-
eral versus bilateral. BMC Surg. 2020;20:286.
 56. Angleitner P, Stelzmueller ME, Mahr S, et al. Bilateral or unilateral antegrade 
cerebral perfusion during surgery for acute type A dissection. J Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2020;159:2159–2167 .e2152.
 57 . Tiwari KK, Murzi M, Bevilacqua S, et al. Which cannulation (ascending aortic 
cannulation or peripheral arterial cannulation) is better for acute type A aor-
tic dissection surgery? Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2010;10:797–802.
 58. Preventza O, Garcia A, Tuluca A, et al. Innominate artery cannulation for 
proximal aortic surgery: outcomes and neurological events in 263 patients. 
Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015;48:937–942; discussion 942.
 59. Payabyab EC, Hemli JM, Mattia A, et al. The use of innominate artery can-
nulation for antegrade cerebral perfusion in aortic dissection. J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2020;15:205.
 60. Harky A, Wong CHM, Chan JSK, et al. Innominate artery cannulation in 
aortic surgery: a systematic review. J Card Surg. 2018;33:818–825.
7 .4.2. Management of Acute Type B Aortic Dissection
 1. Suzuki T, Mehta RH, Ince H, et al. Clinical profiles and outcomes of acute 
type B aortic dissection in the current era: lessons from the Interna-
tional Registry of Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation. 2003;108 (Suppl 
1):II312–317 .
 2. Estrera AL, Miller CC 3rd, Safi HJ, et al. Outcomes of medical management 
of acute type B aortic dissection. Circulation. 2006;114:I384–I389.
 3. Umana JP, Lai DT, Mitchell RS, et al. Is medical therapy still the optimal treat-
ment strategy for patients with acute type B aortic dissections? J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2002;124:896–910.
 4. Cambria RP, Conrad MF, Matsumoto AH, et al. Multicenter clinical trial of 
the conformable stent graft for the treatment of acute, complicated type B 
dissection. J Vasc Surg. 2015;62:271–278.
 5. The VIRTUE Registry Investigators. Mid-term outcomes and aortic remodel-
ing after thoracic endovascular repair for acute, subacute, and chronic aortic 
dissection: the VIRTUE Registry. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014;48:363–
371.
 6. Zipfel B, Czerny M, Funovics M, et al. Endovascular treatment of patients 
with types A and B thoracic aortic dissection using Relay thoracic stent-
grafts: results from the RESTORE Patient Registry. J Endovasc Ther. 
2011;18:131–143.
 7 . Norton EL, Williams DM, Kim KM, et al. Management of acute type B aortic 
dissection with malperfusion via endovascular fenestration/stenting. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;160:1151–1161.e1151.
 8. Brunkwall J, Kasprzak P, Verhoeven E, et al. Endovascular repair of acute 
uncomplicated aortic type B dissection promotes aortic remodelling: 1 
year results of the ADSORB trial. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014;48: 
285–291.
 9. Schwartz SI, Durham C, Clouse WD, et al. Predictors of late aortic interven-
tion in patients with medically treated type B aortic dissection. J Vasc Surg. 
2018;67:78–84.
 10. Nienaber CA, Kische S, Akin I, et al. Strategies for subacute/chronic type 
B aortic dissection: the Investigation Of Stent Grafts in Patients with type 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e467
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
B Aortic Dissection (INSTEAD) trial 1-year outcome. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2010;140(suppl 6):S101–S108; discussion S142–S146.
 11. Cambria RP, Crawford RS, Cho JS, et al. A multicenter clinical trial of endo-
vascular stent graft repair of acute catastrophes of the descending thoracic 
aorta. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50:1255–1264.e1-4.
 12. Sachs T, Pomposelli F, Hagberg R, et al. Open and endovascular repair of 
type B aortic dissection in the Nationwide Inpatient Sample. J Vasc Surg. 
2010;52:860–866; discussion 866.
 13. Nienaber CA, Kische S, Rousseau H, et al. Endovascular repair of type B 
aortic dissection: long-term results of the randomized investigation of stent 
grafts in aortic dissection trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;6:407–416.
 14. Torrent DJ, McFarland GE, Wang G, et al. Timing of thoracic endovascular 
aortic repair for uncomplicated acute type B aortic dissection and the as-
sociation with complications. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:826–835.
 15. Trimarchi S, Eagle KA, Nienaber CA, et al. Importance of refractory 
pain and hypertension in acute type B aortic dissection. Insights from 
the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD). Circulation. 
2010;122:1283–1289.
7 .5. Management of IMH
 1. Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute aortic intramural hema-
toma: an analysis from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. 
Circulation. 2012;126:S91–S96.
 2. Tolenaar JL, Harris KM, Upchurch GR Jr, et al. The differences and similari-
ties between intramural hematoma of the descending aorta and acute type 
B dissection. J Vasc Surg. 2013;58:1498–1504.
 3. Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term behavior of aortic 
intramural hematomas and penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:361–373.e1.
 4. Hata M, Hata H, Sezai A, et al. Optimal treatment strategy for type A acute 
aortic dissection with intramural hematoma. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;147:307–311.
 5. Matsushita A, Fukui T, Tabata M, et al. Preoperative characteristics and 
surgical outcomes of acute intramural hematoma involving the ascend-
ing aorta: a propensity score-matched analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:351–358.
 6. Sandhu HK, Tanaka A, Charlton-Ouw KM, et al. Outcomes and management 
of type A intramural hematoma. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;5:317–327 .
 7 . Choi Y J, Son JW, Lee SH, et al. Treatment patterns and their outcomes 
of acute aortic intramural hematoma in real world: multicenter registry for 
aortic intramural hematoma. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014;14:103.
 8. Wee I, Varughese RS, Syn N, et al. Non-operative management of type A 
acute aortic syndromes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2019;58:41–51.
 9. Chow SCY, Wong RHL, Lakhani I, et al. Management of acute type A intra-
mural hematoma: upfront surgery or individualized approach? A retrospec-
tive analysis and meta-analysis. J Thorac Dis. 2020;12:680–689.
 10. Shi Y, Dun Y, Guo H, et al. Clinical features and surgical outcomes of type A 
intramural hematoma. J Thorac Dis. 2020;12:3964–3975.
 11. Kitamura T, Torii S, Miyamoto T, et al. Watch-and-wait strategy for type A 
intramural haematoma and acute aortic dissection with thrombosed false 
lumen of the ascending aorta: a Japanese single-centre experience. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;58:590–597 .
 12. Song JK, Yim JH, Ahn JM, et al. Outcomes of patients with acute type A 
aortic intramural hematoma. Circulation. 2009;120:2046–2052.
 13. Schoenhoff FS, Zanchin C, Czerny M, et al. Aorta Related and All-cause 
Mortality in Patients with Aortic Intramural Haematoma. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg. 2017;54:447–453.
 14. Chakos A, Twindyawardhani T, Evangelista A, et al. Endovascular versus 
medical management of type B intramural hematoma: a meta-analysis. Ann 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;8:447–455.
 15. Moral S, Cuellar H, Avegliano G, et al. Clinical Implications of Focal Inti-
mal Disruption in Patients With T ype B Intramural Hematoma. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology (JACC). 2017;69:28–39.
 16. Moral S, Ballesteros E, Roque M, et al. Intimal disruption in type B aortic 
intramural hematoma. Does size matter? A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2018;269:298–303.
 17 . Li L, Jiao Y, Zou J, et al. Thoracic endovascular aortic repair versus best 
medical treatment for high-risk type B intramural hematoma: a systematic 
review of clinical studies. Ann Vasc Surg. 2018;52:273–279.
 18. Kageyama S, Mitake H, Nakajima A, et al. A novel risk score on admission 
for predicting death or need for surgery in patients with acute type A intra-
mural hematoma receiving medical therapy. Heart Vessels. 2020;35:1164–
1170.
 19. Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic intramural he-
matoma with and without penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and 
radiological analysis. Circulation. 2002;106:342–348.
 20. Evangelista A, Dominguez R, Sebastia C, et al. Prognostic value of clinical 
and morphologic findings in short-term evolution of aortic intramural hae-
matoma. Therapeutic implications. Eur Heart J. 2004;25:81–87 .
 21. Li Z, Chen Y, Guo J, et al. Prediction of adverse events in patients with 
initially medically treated type A intramural hematoma. Int J Cardiol. 
2020;313:114–120.
 22. Li Z, Lu B, Chen Y, et al. Acute type B aortic intramural hematoma: the 
added prognostic value of a follow-up CT. Eur Radiol. 2019;29:6571–6580.
7 .6.1. PAU With IMH, Rupture, or Both
 1. Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic intramural he-
matoma with and without penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and 
radiological analysis. Circulation. 2002;106:342–348.
 2. Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-up of penetrating ul-
cer and intramural hematoma of the aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;123:1051–1059.
 3. Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term behavior of aortic 
intramural hematomas and penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:361–373.e1.
 4. Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI, et al. Surgical or endovas-
cular therapy of abdominal penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural his-
tory: a systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2013;24:1437–1449.e1433.
 5. Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation, complications, and nat-
ural history of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 
2012;55:10–15.
 6. Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating atherosclerotic ul-
cer of the descending thoracic aorta and arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;127:1393–1399; discussion 1399–1401.
 7 . Kotsis T, Spyropoulos BG, Asaloumidis N, et al. Penetrating atherosclerotic 
ulcers of the abdominal aorta: a case report and review of the literature. 
Vasc Spec Int. 2019;35:152–159.
7 .6.2. Isolated PAU
 1. Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic intramural he-
matoma with and without penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and 
radiological analysis. Circulation. 2002;106:342–348.
 2. Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-up of penetrating ul-
cer and intramural hematoma of the aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;123:1051–1059.
 3. Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term behavior of aortic 
intramural hematomas and penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:361–373.e1.
 4. Yang L, Zhang QY, Wang XZ, et al. Long-term imaging evolution and clinical 
prognosis among patients with acute penetrating aortic ulcers: a retrospec-
tive observational study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014505.
 5. Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation, complications, and nat-
ural history of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 
2012;55:10–15.
 6. Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI, et al. Surgical or endovas-
cular therapy of abdominal penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural his-
tory: a systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2013;24:1437–1449.e1433.
 7 . Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-term outcomes in isolated 
penetrating aortic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:84–91.
 8. D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al; Thoracic endovascular aor-
tic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer: literature review. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;101:2272–2278.
 9. Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating atherosclerotic ul-
cer of the descending thoracic aorta and arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;127:1393–1399; discussion 1399–1401.
 10. DeCarlo C, Latz CA, Boitano L T, et al. Prognostication of asymptomatic 
penetrating aortic ulcers: a modern approach. Circulation. 2021;144:1091–
1101.
 11. Gifford SM, Duncan AA, Greiten LE, et al. The natural history and out-
comes for thoracic and abdominal penetrating aortic ulcers. J Vasc Surg. 
2016;63:1182–1188.
7 .6.3. PAU Open Surgical Repair Versus Endovascular Repair
 1. Amis ES Jr, Butler PF, American College of Radiology. ACR white paper on 
radiation dose in medicine: three years later. J Am Coll Radiol. 2010;7:865–
870.
 2. Brenner DJ, Hall EJ. Computed tomography--an increasing source of radia-
tion exposure. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2277–2284.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e468
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 3. Costello JE, Cecava ND, Tucker JE, et al. CT radiation dose: current 
controversies and dose reduction strategies. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
2013;201:1283–1290.
 4. Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI, et al. Surgical or endovas-
cular therapy of abdominal penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural his-
tory: a systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2013;24:1437–1449.e1433.
 5. Georgiadis GS, Trellopoulos G, Antoniou GA, et al. Endovascular therapy for 
penetrating ulcers of the infrarenal aorta. ANZ J Surg. 2013;83:758–763.
 6. Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-term outcomes in isolated 
penetrating aortic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:84–91.
 7 . D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al; Thoracic endovascular aor-
tic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer: literature review. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;101:2272–2278.
 8. Ganaha F, Miller DC, Sugimoto K, et al. Prognosis of aortic intramural he-
matoma with and without penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer: a clinical and 
radiological analysis. Circulation. 2002;106:342–348.
 9. Tittle SL, Lynch RJ, Cole PE, et al. Midterm follow-up of penetrating ul-
cer and intramural hematoma of the aorta. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2002;123:1051–1059.
 10. Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term behavior of aortic 
intramural hematomas and penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:361–373.e1.
 11. Troxler M, Mavor AI, Homer-Vanniasinkam S. Penetrating atherosclerotic 
ulcers of the aorta. Br J Surg. 2001;88:1169–1177 .
 12. Pape LA, Awais M, Woznicki EM, et al. Presentation, diagnosis, and out-
comes of acute aortic dissection: 17-year trends from the International Reg-
istry of Acute Aortic Dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:350–358.
 13. Harris KM, Braverman AC, Eagle KA, et al. Acute aortic intramural hema-
toma: an analysis from the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection. 
Circulation. 2012;126:S91–S96.
7 .7 .1.1. Initial Management of BTTAI in the Emergency 
Department
 1. Pate JW, Gavant ML, Weiman DS, et al. Traumatic rupture of the aor-
tic isthmus: program of selective management. World J Surg. 1999;23: 
59–63.
 2. Fabian TC, Davis KA, Gavant ML, et al. Prospective study of blunt aortic 
injury: helical CT is diagnostic and antihypertensive therapy reduces rupture. 
Ann Surg. 1998;227:666–676; discussion 676–677 .
 3. Scalea TM, Feliciano DV, DuBose JJ, et al. Blunt Thoracic Aortic Injury: En-
dovascular Repair Is Now the Standard. J Am Coll Surg. 2019;228:605–
610.
 4. Fabian TC, Richardson JD, Croce MA, et al. Prospective study of blunt aor-
tic injury: Multicenter Trial of the American Association for the Surgery of 
Trauma. J Trauma. 1997;42:374–380; discussion 380–383.
 5. Gombert A, Barbati ME, Storck M, et al. Treatment of blunt thoracic aortic 
injury in Germany-assessment of the TraumaRegister DGU®. PLoS One. 
2017;12:e0171837 .
 6. Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular repair of traumatic 
thoracic aortic injury: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular 
Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:187–192.
 7 . Marcaccio CL, Dumas RP, Huang Y, et al. Delayed endovascular aortic re-
pair is associated with reduced in-hospital mortality in patients with blunt 
thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2018;68:64–73.
 8. Demetriades D, Velmahos GC, Scalea TM, et al. Blunt traumatic thoracic 
aortic injuries: early or delayed repair-results of an American Association for 
the Surgery of Trauma prospective study. J Trauma. 2009;66:967–973.
7 .7 .1.2. Approach to the Initial Management of BTTAI
 1. Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular repair of traumatic 
thoracic aortic injury: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular 
Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:187–192.
 2. Azizzadeh A, Keyhani K, Miller CC 3rd, et al. Blunt traumatic aortic injury: 
initial experience with endovascular repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1403–
1408.
 3. DuBose JJ, Leake SS, Brenner M, et al. Contemporary management and 
outcomes of blunt thoracic aortic injury: a multicenter retrospective study. J 
Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78:360–369.
 4. Fortuna GR Jr, Perlick A, DuBose JJ, et al. Injury grade is a predictor of 
aortic-related death among patients with blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc 
Surg. 2016;63:1225–1231.
 5. Grigorian A, Spencer D, Donayre C, et al. National trends of thoracic endo-
vascular aortic repair versus open repair in blunt thoracic aortic injury. Ann 
Vasc Surg. 2018;52:72-78.
 6. Rabin J, DuBose J, Sliker CW, et al. Parameters for successful nonop-
erative management of traumatic aortic injury. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;147:143-149.
 7 . Starnes BW, Lundgren RS, Gunn M, et al. A new classification scheme for 
treating blunt aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2012;55:47-54.
 8. Harris DG, Rabin J, Starnes BW, et al. Evolution of lesion-specific manage-
ment of blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2016;64:500-505.
 9. Gavant ML. Helical CT grading of traumatic aortic injuries. Impact on clini-
cal guidelines for medical and surgical management. Radiol Clin North Am. 
1999;37:553–574, vi.
7 .7 .1.3. Endovascular Versus Open Surgical Repair
 1. Xenos ES, Abedi NN, Davenport DL, et al. Meta-analysis of endovascular vs 
open repair for traumatic descending thoracic aortic rupture. J Vasc Surg. 
2008;48:1343–1351.
 2. Grigorian A, Spencer D, Donayre C, et al. National trends of thoracic endo-
vascular aortic repair versus open repair in blunt thoracic aortic injury. Ann 
Vasc Surg. 2018;52:72–78.
 3. Murad MH, Rizvi AZ, Malgor R, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 
the treatments for thoracic aortic transection [corrected]. J Vasc Surg. 
2011;53:193–199. e1–21.
 4. Pang D, Hildebrand D, Bachoo P. Thoracic endovascular repair (TEVAR) 
versus open surgery for blunt traumatic thoracic aortic injury. Cochrane Da-
tabase Syst Rev. 2019;CD006642.
 5. Kenel-Pierre S, Ramos Duran E, Abi-Chaker A, et al. The role of hepa-
rin in endovascular repair of blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;70:1809–1815.
 6. Scalea TM, Feliciano DV, DuBose JJ, et al. Blunt Thoracic Aortic Injury: En-
dovascular Repair Is Now the Standard. J Am Coll Surg. 2019;228:605–
610.
7 .7 .2. Initial Management of Blunt Traumatic Abdominal Aortic 
Injury (BAAI)
 1. Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Brenner ML, et al. Blunt abdominal aortic injury: a 
Western Trauma Association multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2014;77:879–885; discussion 885.
 2. Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Tran NT, et al. Blunt abdominal aortic injury. J Vasc 
Surg. 2012;55:1277–1285.
 3. Sheehan BM, Grigorian A, de Virgilio C, et al. Predictors of blunt abdomi-
nal aortic injury in trauma patients and mortality analysis. J Vasc Surg. 
2020;71:1858–1866.
 4. de Mestral C, Dueck AD, Gomez D, et al. Associated injuries, management, 
and outcomes of blunt abdominal aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56:656–
660.
 5. Borovcanin Z. Anesthesia for abdominal major vascular injury. In: Papadakos 
PJ, Gestring ML, eds. Encyclopedia of Trauma Care. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg; 2015:15–20.
 6. Norii T, Crandall C, Terasaka Y. Survival of severe blunt trauma patients 
treated with resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta com-
pared with propensity score-adjusted untreated patients. J Trauma Acute 
Care Surg. 2015;78:721–728.
 7 . Joseph B, Zeeshan M, Sakran JV, et al. Nationwide analysis of resuscitative 
endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta in civilian trauma. JAMA Surg. 
2019;154:500–508.
 8. Manzano-Nunez R, Orlas CP, Herrera-Escobar JP, et al. A meta-analysis of 
the incidence of complications associated with groin access after the use of 
resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta in trauma patients. 
J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018;85:626–634.
 9. Ordonez CA, Rodriguez F, Parra M, et al. Resuscitative endovascular balloon 
of the aorta is feasible in penetrating chest trauma with major hemorrhage: 
proposal of a new institutional deployment algorithm. J Trauma Acute Care 
Surg. 2020;89:311–319.
 10. Darrabie MD, Croft CA, Brakenridge SC, et al. Resuscitative endovascu -
lar balloon occlusion of the aorta: implementation and preliminary results at 
an academic level I trauma center. J Am Coll Surg. 2018;227:127–133.
 11. Moore LJ, Martin CD, Harvin JA, et al. Resuscitative endovascular balloon 
occlusion of the aorta for control of noncompressible truncal hemorrhage in 
the abdomen and pelvis. Am J Surg. 2016;212:1222–1230.
 12. Yamamoto R, Cestero RF, Suzuki M, et al. Resuscitative endovascular bal-
loon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) is associated with improved survival in 
severely injured patients: a propensity score matching analysis. Am J Surg. 
2019;218:1162–1168.
 13. Starnes BW, Lundgren RS, Gunn M, et al. A new classification scheme for 
treating blunt aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2012;55:47–54.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e469
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 14. Azizzadeh A, Keyhani K, Miller CC 3rd, et al. Blunt traumatic aortic injury: 
initial experience with endovascular repair. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1403–
1408.
7 .7 .3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance After Blunt 
Traumatic Aortic Injury (BTAI)
 1. DuBose JJ, Leake SS, Brenner M, et al. Contemporary management and 
outcomes of blunt thoracic aortic injury: a multicenter retrospective study. J 
Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015;78:360–369.
 2. Topcu AC, Ozeren-Topcu K, Bolukcu A, et al. Blunt traumatic aortic injury: 
10-year single-center experience. Aorta (Stamford). 2020;8:163–168.
 3. Charlton-Ouw KM, DuBose JJ, Leake SS, et al. Observation may be safe 
in selected cases of blunt traumatic abdominal aortic injury. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2016;30:34–39.
 4. Shalhub S, Starnes BW, Brenner ML, et al. Blunt abdominal aortic injury: a 
Western Trauma Association multicenter study. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 
2014;77:879–885; discussion 885.
 5. Jacob-Brassard J, Salata K, Kayssi A, et al. A systematic review of nonopera-
tive management in blunt thoracic aortic injury. J Vasc Surg. 2019;70:1675–
1681.e6.
 6. Lee WA, Matsumura JS, Mitchell RS, et al. Endovascular repair of traumatic 
thoracic aortic injury: clinical practice guidelines of the Society for Vascular 
Surgery. J Vasc Surg. 2011;53:187–192.
7 .8.1. Long-Term Surveillance Imaging After Aortic Dissection 
and IMH
 1. Aizawa K, Kawahito K, Misawa Y. Long-term outcomes of tear-oriented 
ascending/hemiarch replacements for acute type A aortic dissection. Gen 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016;64:403-408.
 2. Bajona P, Quintana E, Schaff HV, et al. Aortic arch surgery after previous 
type A dissection repair: results up to 5 years. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac 
Surg. 2015;21:81-85; discussion 85-86.
 3. Kimura N, Itoh S, Yuri K, et al. Reoperation for enlargement of the distal 
aorta after initial surgery for acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2015;149(suppl 2):S91-S98.e1.
 4. Arafat A, Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, et al. Stent grafting acute aortic dissec-
tion: comparison of DeBakey extent IIIA versus IIIB. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;102:1473-1481.
 5. Stelzmueller ME, Nolz R, Mahr S, et al. Thoracic endovascular repair for acute 
complicated type B aortic dissections. J Vasc Surg. 2019;69:318–326.
 6. Huang W, Yang F, Luo J, et al. Outcomes and morphologic changes of imme-
diate type IA endoleak following endovascular repair of acute type B aortic 
dissection. Ann Vasc Surg. 2015;29:174–182.
 7 . Akin I, Kische S, Rehders TC, et al. Thoracic endovascular stent-graft thera-
py in aortic dissection. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2010;25:552–559.
 8. Halstead JC, Meier M, Etz C, et al. The fate of the distal aorta after repair of 
acute type A aortic dissection. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133:127–
135.
 9. Sievers HH, Richardt D, Diwoky M, et al. Survival and reoperation after 
valve-sparing root replacement and root repair in acute type A dissection. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2018;156:2076–2082.e2072.
 10. Chiu P, Trojan J, Tsou S, et al. Limited root repair in acute type A aortic dis-
section is safe but results in increased risk of reoperation. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;155:1–7 .e1.
 11. The VIRTUE Registry Investigators. Mid-term outcomes and aortic remodel-
ing after thoracic endovascular repair for acute, subacute, and chronic aortic 
dissection: the VIRTUE Registry. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2014;48:363–
371.
 12. Giles KA, Beck AW, Lala S, et al. Implications of secondary aortic interven-
tion after thoracic endovascular aortic repair for acute and chronic type B 
dissection. J Vasc Surg. 2019;69:1367–1378.
7 .8.2. Long-Term Management After Acute Aortic Dissection and 
IMH
 1. Wang H, Wagner M, Benrashid E, et al. Outcomes of reoperation after acute 
type A aortic dissection: implications for index repair strategy. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2017;6:e006376.
 2. Bajona P, Quintana E, Schaff HV, et al. Aortic arch surgery after previous 
type A dissection repair: results up to 5 years. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac 
Surg. 2015;21:81–85; discussion 85–86.
 3. Malvindi PG, van Putte BP, Sonker U, et al. Reoperation after acute type 
A aortic dissection repair: a series of 104 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95:922–927 .
 4. Arafat A, Roselli EE, Idrees JJ, et al. Stent grafting acute aortic dissec-
tion: comparison of DeBakey extent IIIA versus IIIB. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;102:1473–1481.
7 .8.3. Long-Term Management and Surveillance for PAUs
 1. Georgiadis GS, Antoniou GA, Georgakarakos EI, et al. Surgical or endo -
vascular therapy of abdominal penetrating aortic ulcers and their natural 
history: a systematic review. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2013;24:1437–1449.
e1433.
 2. Georgiadis GS, Trellopoulos G, Antoniou GA, et al. Endovascular therapy 
for penetrating ulcers of the infrarenal aorta. ANZ J Surg. 2013;83:758–
763.
 3. D’Annoville T, Ozdemir BA, Alric P, et al; Thoracic endovascular aor-
tic repair for penetrating aortic ulcer: literature review. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2016;101:2272–2278.
 4. Yang L, Zhang QY, Wang XZ, et al. Long-term imaging evolution and clinical 
prognosis among patients with acute penetrating aortic ulcers: a retrospec-
tive observational study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014505.
 5. Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, Charilaou P, et al. Long-term behavior of aortic 
intramural hematomas and penetrating ulcers. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2016;151:361–373.e1.
 6. Cho KR, Stanson AW, Potter DD, et al. Penetrating atherosclerotic ul-
cer of the descending thoracic aorta and arch. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;127:1393–1399; discussion 1399–1401.
 7 . Nathan DP, Boonn W, Lai E, et al. Presentation, complications, and nat-
ural history of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 
2012;55:10–15.
 8. Salim S, Locci R, Martin G, et al. Short- and long-term outcomes in isolated 
penetrating aortic ulcer disease. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72:84–91.
8.1. Counseling and Management of Aortic Disease in 
Pregnancy and Postpartum
 1. Roos-Hesselink JW, Budts W, Walker F, et al. Organisation of care for preg-
nancy in patients with congenital heart disease. Heart. 2017;103:1854–
1859.
 2. Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by muta-
tions in the TGF-beta receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:788–798.
 3. Murray ML, Pepin M, Peterson S, et al. Pregnancy-related deaths and com-
plications in women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Genet Med. 
2014;16:874–880.
 4. Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for 
the Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.
 5. MacCarrick G, Black JH 3rd, Bowdin S, et al. Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a prim-
er for diagnosis and management. Genet Med. 2014;16:576–587 .
 6. Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic complications associated 
with pregnancy in Marfan syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Ge-
netically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovascular Condi-
tions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004052.
 7 . Donnelly RT, Pinto NM, Kocolas I, et al. The immediate and long-term impact 
of pregnancy on aortic growth rate and mortality in women with Marfan 
syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:224–229.
 8. Kuperstein R, Cahan T, Yoeli-Ullman R, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in 
pregnant patients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2017;119:132–
137 .
 9. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC 
guidelines for the management of cardiovascular diseases during preg-
nancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.
 10. Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis S, et al. Maternal and fetal outcomes in preg-
nancies complicated by the inherited aortopathy Loeys-Dietz syndrome. 
BJOG. 2019;126:1025–1031.
 11. Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of pregnancy in the Marfan 
syndrome. Am J Med. 1981;71:784–790.
 12. Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH, et al. Cardiovascular 
health in Turner syndrome: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2018;11:e000048.
 13. Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis SL, et al. Maternal and fetal outcomes in preg-
nancies complicated by Marfan syndrome. Heart. 2019;105:1725–1731.
 14. Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic 
disease data from the Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart. 
2021;107:1704–1709.
 15. Cauldwell M, Steer P, Sterrenburg M, et al. Birth weight in pregnancies com-
plicated by maternal heart disease. Heart. 2019;105:391–398.
 16. Deleted in press.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e470
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 17 . Seely EW, Ecker J. Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Circulation. 
2014;129:1254–1261.
 18. Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al. Pregnancy and aortic root growth 
in the Marfan syndrome: a prospective study. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:914–
920.
 19. Rossiter JP, Repke JT, Morales AJ, et al. A prospective longitudinal 
evaluation of pregnancy in the Marfan syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
1995;173:1599–1606.
 20. Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al. Association between MRI ex-
posure during pregnancy and fetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA. 
2016;316:952–961.
 21. Chartier AL, Bouvier MJ, McPherson DR, et al. The safety of maternal and 
fetal MRI at 3 T. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2019;213:1170–1173.
 22. Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al. Clinical features and out -
comes of pregnancy-related acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol. 
2021;6:58–66.
 23. Tran-Fadulu V, Pannu H, Kim DH, et al. Analysis of multigenerational families 
with thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections due to TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 
mutations. J Med Genet. 2009;46:607–613.
 24. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 25. Byers PH, Belmont J, Black J, et al. Diagnosis, natural history, and manage-
ment in vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med 
Genet. 2017;175:40–47 .
 26. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Estrera AL, et al. Acute aortic dissections with preg-
nancy in women with ACTA2 mutations. Am J Med Genet A. 2014;164:106–
112.
 27 . Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK pathogenic variants aortic 
disease presentation, pregnancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic 
missense variants. Genet Med. 2019;21:144–151.
 28. Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in Turner syndrome: two 
cases and review of 85 cases in the literature. J Med Genet. 2007;44:745–
74 9.
 29. Immer FF, Bansi AG, Immer-Bansi AS, et al. Aortic dissection in pregnancy: 
analysis of risk factors and outcome. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;76:309–314.
 30. Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: genetic testing in the diagno-
sis and management of patients with aortic disease. Heart. 2021;107:619–
626.
 31. Pinard A, Jones GT, Milewicz DM. Genetics of thoracic and abdominal aortic 
diseases. Circ Res. 2019;124:588–606.
 32. Hostetler EM, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. SMAD3 pathogenic variants: 
risk for thoracic aortic disease and associated complications from the Mon-
talcino Aortic Consortium. J Med Genet. 2019;56:252–260.
 33. van de Luijtgaarden KM, Bastos Goncalves F, Hoeks SE, et al. Higher 30 
day mortality in patients with familial abdominal aortic aneurysm after EVAR. 
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2017;54:142–149.
 34. Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural history of type B aortic 
dissection in patients with PRKG1 mutation c.530G>A (p.Arg177Gln). J 
Vasc Surg. 2019;70:718–723.
 35. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:1269–
1324.
 36. Doyle JJ, Doyle AJ, Wilson NK, et al. A deleterious gene-by-environment 
interaction imposed by calcium channel blockers in Marfan syndrome. Elife. 
2015;4:e08648.
8.2. Delivery in Pregnant Patients With Aortopathy
 1. Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al. Clinical features and outcomes 
of pregnancy-related acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:58–66.
 2. Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic 
disease data from the Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart. 
2021;107:1704–1709.
 3. Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of pregnancy in the Marfan 
syndrome. Am J Med. 1981;71:784–790.
 4. Kamel H, Roman MJ, Pitcher A, et al. Pregnancy and the risk of aortic dis-
section or rupture: a cohort-crossover analysis. Circulation. 2016;134:527–
533.
 5. Kuperstein R, Cahan T, Yoeli-Ullman R, et al. Risk of aortic dissection in 
pregnant patients with the Marfan syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2017;119:132–
137 .
 6. Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic complications associated 
with pregnancy in Marfan syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Ge-
netically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovascular Condi-
tions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004052.
 7 . Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al. Pregnancy and aortic root growth 
in the Marfan syndrome: a prospective study. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:914–
920.
 8. Minsart AF, Mongeon FP, Laberge AM, et al. Obstetric and cardiac outcomes 
in women with Marfan syndrome and an aortic root diameter ≤ 45mm. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2018;230:68–72.
 9. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC 
guidelines for the management of cardiovascular diseases during preg-
nancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.
 10. Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis SL, et al. Maternal and fetal outcomes in preg-
nancies complicated by Marfan syndrome. Heart. 2019;105:1725–1731.
 11. Williams D, Lindley KJ, Russo M, et al. Pregnancy after aortic root replace-
ment in Marfan’s syndrome: a case series and review of the literature. AJP 
Rep. 2018;8:e234–e240.
 12. Braverman AC, Moon MR, Geraghty P, et al. Pregnancy after aortic root 
replacement in Loeys-Dietz syndrome: high risk of aortic dissection. Am J 
Med Genet A. 2016;170:2177–2180.
 13. Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for 
the Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.
 14. McNeilly G, Nicholl A, Broadway J, et al. Dural ectasia in Marfan’s syndrome: 
magnetic resonance imaging appearances and anaesthetic experience of 
three deliveries. Int J Obstet Anesth. 2013;22:337–339.
8.3. Surgery Before Pregnancy in Women With Aortic Disease
 1. Meijboom LJ, Vos FE, Timmermans J, et al. Pregnancy and aortic root growth 
in the Marfan syndrome: a prospective study. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:914–
920.
 2. Minsart AF, Mongeon FP, Laberge AM, et al. Obstetric and cardiac outcomes 
in women with Marfan syndrome and an aortic root diameter ≤ 45mm. Eur J 
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2018;230:68–72.
 3. Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al. Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic 
disease data from the Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease. Heart. 
2021;107:1704–1709.
 4. Narula N, Devereux RB, Malonga GP, et al. Pregnancy-related aortic compli-
cations in women with Marfan syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:870–
879.
 5. Braverman AC, Mittauer E, Harris KM, et al. Clinical features and outcomes 
of pregnancy-related acute aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:58–66.
 6. Pyeritz RE. Maternal and fetal complications of pregnancy in the Marfan 
syndrome. Am J Med. 1981;71:784–790.
 7 . Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al. Aortic complications associated 
with pregnancy in Marfan syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Ge-
netically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and Cardiovascular Condi-
tions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e004052.
 8. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno -
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 9. Matura LA, Ho VB, Rosing DR, et al. Aortic dilatation and dissection in Turn-
er syndrome. Circulation. 2007;116:1663–1670.
 10. Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH, et al. Cardiovascular 
health in Turner syndrome: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2018;11:e000048.
 11. Carlson M, Silberbach M. Dissection of the aorta in Turner syndrome: two 
cases and review of 85 cases in the literature. J Med Genet. 2007;44:745–
74 9.
 12. Braverman AC, Moon MR, Geraghty P, et al. Pregnancy after aortic root 
replacement in Loeys-Dietz syndrome: high risk of aortic dissection. Am J 
Med Genet A. 2016;170:2177–2180.
 13. Williams D, Lindley KJ, Russo M, et al. Pregnancy after aortic root replace-
ment in Marfan’s syndrome: a case series and review of the literature. AJP 
Rep. 2018;8:e234–e240.
 14. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e471
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 15. Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for 
the Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.
 16. Boileau C, Guo DC, Hanna N, et al. TGFB2 mutations cause familial thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections associated with mild systemic features of 
Marfan syndrome. Nat Genet. 2012;44:916–921.
 17 . Marsili L, Overwater E, Hanna N, et al. Phenotypic spectrum of TGFB3 
disease-causing variants in a Dutch-French cohort and first report of a ho-
mozygous patient. Clin Genet. 2020;97:723–730.
 18. Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by muta-
tions in the TGF-beta receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:788–798.
 19. Jondeau G, Ropers J, Regalado E, et al. International Registry of Patients 
Carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 Mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino 
Aortic Consortium). Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:548–558.
 20. van Hagen IM, van der Linde D, van de Laar IM, et al. Pregnancy in women 
with SMAD3 mutation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:1356–1358.
 21. Regalado ES, Guo DC, Estrera AL, et al. Acute aortic dissections with preg-
nancy in women with ACTA2 mutations. Am J Med Genet A. 2014;164:106–
112.
 22. Wallace SE, Regalado ES, Gong L, et al. MYLK pathogenic variants aortic 
disease presentation, pregnancy risk, and characterization of pathogenic 
missense variants. Genet Med. 2019;21:144–151.
 23. Shalhub S, Regalado ES, Guo DC, et al. The natural history of type B aortic 
dissection in patients with PRKG1 mutation c.530G>A (p.Arg177Gln). J 
Vasc Surg. 2019;70:718–723.
 24. Milewicz DM, Regalado ES. Use of genetics for personalized management 
of heritable thoracic aortic disease: how do we get there? J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2015;149:S3–S5.
 25. Immer FF, Krahenbuhl E, Hagen U, et al. Large area of the false lumen 
favors secondary dilatation of the aorta after acute type A aortic dissection. 
Circulation. 2005;112:I249–I252.
 26. McKellar SH, MacDonald RJ, Michelena HI, et al. Frequency of cardio-
vascular events in women with a congenitally bicuspid aortic valve in 
a single community and effect of pregnancy on events. Am J Cardiol. 
2011;107:96–99.
 27 . Wojnarski CM, Svensson LG, Roselli EE, et al. Aortic dissection in pa-
tients with bicuspid aortic valve-associated aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2015;100:1666–1673; discussion 1673–1674.
 28. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC 
guidelines for the management of cardiovascular diseases during preg-
nancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.
 29. Thakker PD, Braverman AC. Cardiogenetics: genetic testing in the diagno-
sis and management of patients with aortic disease. Heart. 2021;107:619–
626.
8.4. Pregnancy in Patients With Aortopathy: Aortic Dissection 
and Aortic Surgery in Pregnancy
 1. Lansman SL, Goldberg JB, Kai M, et al. Aortic surgery in pregnancy. J Tho-
rac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153:S44–S48.
 2. Zhu JM, Ma WG, Peterss S, et al. Aortic dissection in pregnancy: manage-
ment strategy and outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2017;103:1199–1206.
 3. Yates MT, Soppa G, Smelt J, et al. Perioperative management and out-
comes of aortic surgery during pregnancy. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;149:607–610.
 4. Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al. 2018 ESC 
guidelines for the management of cardiovascular diseases during preg-
nancy. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3165–3241.
 5. Tadros RO, Tang GHL, Barnes HJ, et al. Optimal treatment of uncomplicated 
type B aortic dissection: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1494–1504.
9.1. Inflammatory Aortitis: Diagnosis and Treatment of Takayasu 
Arteritis and Giant Cell Arteritis
 1. Dejaco C, Ramiro S, Duftner C, et al. EULAR recommendations for the 
use of imaging in large vessel vasculitis in clinical practice. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2018;77:636–643.
 2. Hauenstein C, Reinhard M, Geiger J, et al. Effects of early corticosteroid 
treatment on magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasonography findings in 
giant cell arteritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012;51:1999–2003.
 3. Prieto-Gonzalez S, Arguis P, Garcia-Martinez A, et al. Large vessel involve-
ment in biopsy-proven giant cell arteritis: prospective study in 40 newly 
diagnosed patients using CT angiography. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012;71:1170–
1176.
 4. Blockmans D, Stroobants S, Maes A, et al. Positron emission tomography in 
giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica: evidence for inflammation of 
the aortic arch. Am J Med. 2000;108:246–249.
 5. Lariviere D, Benali K, Coustet B, et al. Positron emission tomography and 
computed tomography angiography for the diagnosis of giant cell arteritis: a 
real-life prospective study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e4146.
 6. Yamada I, Nakagawa T, Himeno Y, et al. Takayasu arteritis: diagnosis with 
breath-hold contrast-enhanced three-dimensional MR angiography. J Magn 
Reson Imaging. 2000;11:481–487 .
 7 . Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, et al. 2018 update of the EULAR recom-
mendations for the management of large vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2020;79:19–30.
 8. Mazlumzadeh M, Hunder GG, Easley KA, et al. Treatment of giant cell arte-
ritis using induction therapy with high-dose glucocorticoids: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, randomized prospective clinical trial. Arthritis Rheum. 
2006;54:3310–3318.
 9. Chevalet P, Barrier JH, Pottier P, et al. A randomized, multicenter, controlled 
trial using intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone in the initial treatment 
of simple forms of giant cell arteritis: a one year followup study of 164 
patients. J Rheumatol. 2000;27:1484–1491.
 10. Raine C, Stapleton PP, Merinopoulos D, et al. A 26-week feasibility study 
comparing the efficacy and safety of modified-release prednisone with 
immediate-release prednisolone in newly diagnosed cases of giant cell ar-
teritis. Int J Rheum Dis. 2018;21:285–291.
 11. Kyle V, Hazleman BL. Treatment of polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell 
arteritis. II. Relation between steroid dose and steroid associated side ef-
fects. Ann Rheum Dis. 1989;48:662–666.
 12. Les I, Pijoan JI, Rodriguez-Alvarez R, et al. Effectiveness and safety of me-
dium-dose prednisone in giant cell arteritis: a retrospective cohort study of 
103 patients. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015;33:S90–S97 .
 13. Stone JH, Klearman M, Collinson N. Trial of tocilizumab in giant-cell arteritis. 
N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1494–1495.
 14. Jover JA, Hernandez-Garcia C, Morado IC, et al. Combined treatment of 
giant-cell arteritis with methotrexate and prednisone. a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134:106–114.
 15. Misra DP, Rathore U, Patro P, et al. Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs 
for the management of Takayasu arteritis-a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Clin Rheumatol. 2021;40:4391–4416.
 16. Mekinian A, Comarmond C, Resche-Rigon M, et al. Efficacy of biological-
targeted treatments in Takayasu arteritis: multicenter, retrospective study of 
49 patients. Circulation. 2015;132:1693–1700.
 17 . Reichenbach S, Adler S, Bonel H, et al. Magnetic resonance angiography in 
giant cell arteritis: results of a randomized controlled trial of tocilizumab in 
giant cell arteritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018;57:982–986.
 18. Zerizer I, Tan K, Khan S, et al. Role of FDG-PET and PET/CT in the diagno-
sis and management of vasculitis. Eur J Radiol. 2010;73:504–509.
 19. Duftner C, Dejaco C, Sepriano A, et al. Imaging in diagnosis, outcome pre-
diction and monitoring of large vessel vasculitis: a systematic literature 
review and meta-analysis informing the EULAR recommendations. RMD 
Open. 2018;4:e000612.
 20. Blockmans D, de Ceuninck L, Vanderschueren S, et al. Repetitive 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in giant cell arteritis: a 
prospective study of 35 patients. Arthritis Rheum. 2006;55:131–137 .
 21. Saadoun D, Lambert M, Mirault T, et al. Retrospective analysis of surgery 
versus endovascular intervention in Takayasu arteritis: a multicenter experi-
ence. Circulation. 2012;125:813–819.
 22. Saadoun D, Vautier M, Cacoub P. Medium- and large-vessel vasculitis. Circu-
lation. 2021;143:267–282.
 23. Svensson LG, Arafat A, Roselli EE, et al. Inflammatory disease of the aorta: 
patterns and classification of giant cell aortitis, Takayasu arteritis, and non-
syndromic aortitis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;149:S170–S175.
 24. Nuenninghoff DM, Hunder GG, Christianson T J, et al. Incidence and predic-
tors of large-artery complication (aortic aneurysm, aortic dissection, and/or 
large-artery stenosis) in patients with giant cell arteritis: a population-based 
study over 50 years. Arthritis Rheum. 2003;48:3522–3531.
 25. Martinez-Taboada VM, Lopez-Hoyos M, Narvaez J, et al. Effect of anti-
platelet/anticoagulant therapy on severe ischemic complications in pa-
tients with giant cell arteritis: a cumulative meta-analysis. Autoimmun Rev. 
2014;13:788–794.
 26. Smith SC Jr, Allen J, Blair SN, et al. AHA/ACC guidelines for secondary 
prevention for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular dis-
ease: 2006 update. Circulation. 2006;113:2363–2372.
 27 . Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e472
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
9.2.1. Diagnosis and Management of Infection of the Native 
Aorta
 1. Vallejo N, Picardo NE, Bourke P, et al. The changing management of primary 
mycotic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2011;54:334–340.
 2. Kan CD, Lee HL, Luo CY, et al. The efficacy of aortic stent grafts in the man-
agement of mycotic abdominal aortic aneurysm-institute case management 
with systemic literature comparison. Ann Vasc Surg. 2010;24:433–440.
 3. Sorelius K, Wanhainen A, Furebring M, et al. Nationwide study of the treat-
ment of mycotic abdominal aortic aneurysms comparing open and endovas-
cular repair. Circulation. 2016;134:1822–1832.
 4. Sakalihasan N, Michel JB, Katsargyris A, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. 
Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018;4:34.
 5. Wilson WR, Bower TC, Creager MA, et al. Vascular graft infections, mycotic 
aneurysms, and endovascular infections: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e412–e460.
 6. Muller BT, Wegener OR, Grabitz K, et al. Mycotic aneurysms of the thoracic 
and abdominal aorta and iliac arteries: experience with anatomic and extra-
anatomic repair in 33 cases. J Vasc Surg. 2001;33:106–113.
 7 . Oz MC, Brener BJ, Buda JA, et al. A ten-year experience with bacterial 
aortitis. J Vasc Surg. 1989;10:439–449.
 8. Cina CS, Arena GO, Fiture AO, et al. Ruptured mycotic thoracoabdominal 
aortic aneurysms: a report of three cases and a systematic review. J Vasc 
Surg. 2001;33:861–867 .
 9. Yu SY, Lee CH, Hsieh HC, et al. Treatment of primary infected aortic aneu-
rysm without aortic resection. J Vasc Surg. 2012;56:943–950.
 10. Weis-Muller BT, Rascanu C, Sagban A, et al. Single-center experience with 
open surgical treatment of 36 infected aneurysms of the thoracic, thora-
coabdominal, and abdominal aorta. Ann Vasc Surg. 2011;25:1020–1025.
 11. Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: 
diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications: a sci-
entific statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2015;132:1435–1486.
9.2.2. Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic Aortic Graft 
Infection
 1. Low RN, Wall SD, Jeffrey RB Jr, et al. Aortoenteric fistula and perigraft 
infection: evaluation with CT. Radiology. 1990;175:157–162.
 2. Mark A, Moss AA, Lusby R, et al. CT evaluation of complications of abdomi-
nal aortic surgery. Radiology. 1982;145:409–414.
 3. Fukuchi K, Ishida Y, Higashi M, et al. Detection of aortic graft infection by 
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography: comparison with com-
puted tomographic findings. J Vasc Surg. 2005;42:919–925.
 4. Berger P, Vaartjes I, Scholtens A, et al. Differential FDG-PET uptake pat-
terns in uninfected and infected central prosthetic vascular grafts. Eur J 
Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2015;50:376–383.
 5. Sah BR, Husmann L, Mayer D, et al. Diagnostic performance of 18F-
FDG-PET/CT in vascular graft infections. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 
2015;49:455–464.
 6. Shahidi S, Eskil A, Lundof E, et al. Detection of abdominal aortic graft infec-
tion: comparison of magnetic resonance imaging and indium-labeled white 
blood cell scanning. Ann Vasc Surg. 2007;21:586–592.
 7 . O’Connor S, Andrew P, Batt M, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of treatments for aortic graft infection. J Vasc Surg. 2006;44:38–45.
 8. Reilly LM, Stoney RJ, Goldstone J, et al. Improved management of aortic 
graft infection: the influence of operation sequence and staging. J Vasc 
Surg. 1987;5:421–431.
 9. Clagett GP, Valentine RJ, Hagino RT. Autogenous aortoiliac/femoral recon-
struction from superficial femoral-popliteal veins: feasibility and durability. J 
Vasc Surg. 1997;25:255–266; discussion 267–270.
 10. Harlander-Locke MP, Harmon LK, Lawrence PF, et al. The use of cryopre-
served aortoiliac allograft for aortic reconstruction in the United States. J 
Vasc Surg. 2014;59:669–674.
 11. Kieffer E, Gomes D, Chiche L, et al. Allograft replacement for infrarenal 
aortic graft infection: early and late results in 179 patients. J Vasc Surg. 
2004;39:1009–1017 .
 12. Oderich GS, Farber MA, Sanchez LA. Urgent endovascular treatment of 
symptomatic or contained ruptured aneurysms with modified stent grafts. 
Perspect Vasc Surg Endovasc Ther. 2011;23:186–194.
 13. Kakkos SK, Bicknell CD, Tsolakis IA, et al. Editor’s choice - management 
of secondary aorto-enteric and other abdominal arterio-enteric fistulas: a 
review and pooled data analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;52:770–
786.
 14. Haidar GM, Hicks TD, Strosberg DS, et al. “In situ” endografting in the treat-
ment of arterial and graft infections. J Vasc Surg. 2017;65:1824–1829.
 15. Plotkin A, Magee GA, Elsayed RS, et al. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus portends a poor prognosis after endovascular repair of my-
cotic aortic aneurysms and aortic graft infections. J Vasc Surg. 2020;72: 
276–285.
 16. Chiesa R, Astore D, Frigerio S, et al. Vascular prosthetic graft infection: 
epidemiology, bacteriology, pathogenesis and treatment. Acta Chir Belg. 
2002;102:238–247 .
 17 . Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: 
diagnosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications: a sci-
entific statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2015;132:1435–1486.
 18. Lau C, Gaudino M, de Biasi AR, et al. Outcomes of open repair of mycotic 
descending thoracic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2015;100:1712–1717 .
 19. Antonello RM, D’Oria M, Cavallaro M, et al. Management of abdominal aortic 
prosthetic graft and endograft infections. A multidisciplinary update. J Infect 
Chemother. 2019;25:669–680.
 20. Hallett JW Jr, Marshall DM, Petterson TM, et al. Graft-related complica-
tions after abdominal aortic aneurysm repair: reassurance from a 36-year 
population-based experience. J Vasc Surg. 1997;25:277–284; discussion 
285–286.
 21. Lehnert T, Gruber HP, Maeder N, et al. Management of primary aortic 
graft infection by extra-anatomic bypass reconstruction. Eur J Vasc Surg. 
1993;7:301–307 .
 22. Vogel TR, Symons R, Flum DR. The incidence and factors associated with 
graft infection after aortic aneurysm repair. J Vasc Surg. 2008;47:264–269.
 23. Schermerhorn ML, O’Malley AJ, Jhaveri A, et al. Endovascular vs. open re-
pair of abdominal aortic aneurysms in the Medicare population. N Engl J 
Med. 2008;358:464–474.
 24. Hobo R, Buth J, EUROSTAR collaborators. Secondary interventions fol-
lowing endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair using current endo-
grafts. A EUROSTAR report. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43:896–902.e1.
 25. EVAR Trial Participants. Endovascular aneurysm repair versus open repair 
in patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1): randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2005;365:2179–2186.
 26. Oderich GS, Bower TC, Hofer J, et al. In situ rifampin-soaked grafts with 
omental coverage and antibiotic suppression are durable with low reinfec-
tion rates in patients with aortic graft enteric erosion or fistula. J Vasc Surg. 
2011;53:99–106, 107 .e1–7; discussion 106–107 .
 27 . Janko MR, Woo K, Hacker RI, et al. In situ bypass and extra-anatomic by-
pass procedures result in similar survival in patients with secondary aorto-
enteric fistulas. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:210–221.e1.
 28. Bandyk DF, Novotney ML, Back MR, et al. Expanded application of in situ 
replacement for prosthetic graft infection. J Vasc Surg. 2001;34:411–419; 
discussion 419–420.
9.3. Atherosclerotic Disease
 1. Agmon Y, Khandheria BK, Meissner I, et al. Relation of coronary artery dis-
ease and cerebrovascular disease with atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta 
in the general population. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:262–267 .
 2. Caron F, Anand SS. Antithrombotic therapy in aortic diseases: a narrative 
review. Vasc Med. 2017;22:57–65.
 3. Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al. Comparative effectiveness of aspirin 
dosing in cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:1981–1990.
 4. Tunick PA, Rosenzweig BP, Katz ES, et al. High risk for vascular events in 
patients with protruding aortic atheromas: a prospective study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1994;23:1085–1090.
 5. Plehn JF, Davis BR, Sacks FM, et al. Reduction of stroke incidence af-
ter myocardial infarction with pravastatin: the Cholesterol and Recurrent 
Events (CARE) study. The Care Investigators. Circulation. 1999;99:216–
223.
 6. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Effect of potentially modifiable risk 
factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTER-
HEART study): case-control study. Lancet. 2004;364:937–952.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e473
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 7 . Amarenco P, Cohen A, Tzourio C, et al. Atherosclerotic disease of the aortic 
arch and the risk of ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 1994;331:1474–1479.
 8. Tunick PA, Nayar AC, Goodkin GM, et al. Effect of treatment on the inci-
dence of stroke and other emboli in 519 patients with severe thoracic aortic 
plaque. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:1320–1325.
 9. Butler CG, Ho Luxford JM, Huang CC, et al. Aortic atheroma increas-
es the risk of long-term mortality in 20, 000 patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2017;104:1325–1331.
 10. McMahan CA, Gidding SS, Fayad ZA, et al. Risk scores predict atheroscle-
rotic lesions in young people. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165:883–890.
 11. Stary HC, Chandler AB, Dinsmore RE, et al. A definition of advanced types 
of atherosclerotic lesions and a histological classification of atherosclero-
sis. A report from the Committee on Vascular Lesions of the Council on 
Arteriosclerosis, American Heart Association. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
1995;15:1512–1531.
 12. Karalis DG, Chandrasekaran K, Victor MF, et al. Recognition and embolic po-
tential of intraaortic atherosclerotic debris. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:73–
78.
 13. Jones EF, Kalman JM, Calafiore P, et al. Proximal aortic atheroma. An inde-
pendent risk factor for cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 1995;26:218–224.
 14. Khatibzadeh M, Mitusch R, Stierle U, et al. Aortic atherosclerotic plaques as 
a source of systemic embolism. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:664–669.
 15. Mitusch R, Doherty C, Wucherpfennig H, et al. Vascular events during follow-
up in patients with aortic arch atherosclerosis. Stroke. 1997;28:36–39.
 16. Kronzon I, Tunick PA. Aortic atherosclerotic disease and stroke. Circulation. 
2006;114:63–75.
 17 . Qvist I, Soegaard R, Lindholt JS, et al. Adherence to prescribed drugs 
among 65-74 year old men diagnosed with abdominal aortic aneurysm or 
peripheral arterial disease in a screening trial: a VIVA substudy. Eur J Vasc 
Endovasc Surg. 2019;57:442–450.
 18. Phrommintikul A, Krittayaphong R, Wongcharoen W, et al. Management of 
atherosclerosis risk factors for patients at high cardiovascular risk in real-
world practice: a multicentre study. Singapore Med J. 2017;58:535–542.
9.3.1. Aortic Thrombus
 1. Yang S, Yu J, Zeng W, et al. Aortic floating thrombus detected by computed 
tomography angiography incidentally: five cases and a literature review. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;153:791–803.
 2. Caron F, Anand SS. Antithrombotic therapy in aortic diseases: a narrative 
review. Vasc Med. 2017;22:57–65.
 3. Fayad ZY, Semaan E, Fahoum B, et al. Aortic mural thrombus in the normal 
or minimally atherosclerotic aorta. Ann Vasc Surg. 2013;27:282–290.
 4. Arima T, Muroya K, Kawamoto K, et al. Aortic thrombosis in a patient with 
malignant disease: a literature review and case presentation. Vasc Endovas-
cular Surg. 2019;53:139–144.
 5. Morris ME, Galinanes EL, Nichols WK, et al. Thoracic mural thrombi: a case 
series and literature review. Ann Vasc Surg. 2011;25:1140.e1117–1140.
e1121.
 6. Kadoya Y, Zen K, Oda Y, et al. Successful endovascular treatment for aortic 
thrombosis due to primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a case report and 
literature review. Vasc Endovascular Surg. 2019;53:51–57 .
 7 . Meyermann K, Trani J, Caputo FJ, et al. Descending thoracic aortic mu-
ral thrombus presentation and treatment strategies. J Vasc Surg. 
2017;66:931–936.
 8. Barbato VA, Castro R, Goertz A. Case report and review of the literature: 
floating aortic thrombus. Am J Med. 2014;127:e3–e4.
 9. Goldstein SA, Evangelista A, Abbara S, et al. Multimodality imaging of dis-
eases of the thoracic aorta in adults: from the American Society of Echocar-
diography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2015;28:119–182.
 10. Bowdish ME, Weaver FA, Liebman HA, et al. Anticoagulation is an effective 
treatment for aortic mural thrombi. J Vasc Surg. 2002;36:713–719.
 11. Verma S, Siu SC. Aortic dilatation in patients with bicuspid aortic valve. 
N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1920–1929.
9.3.2. Aortic Occlusion
 1. Grip O, Wanhainen A, Bjorck M. Acute aortic occlusion. Circulation. 
2019;139:292–294.
 2. Fang L, Lai Z, Qiu C, et al. Endovascular treatment for infrarenal aortic occlu-
sion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Vasc Surg. 2020;62:432–
441.e13.
 3. Mayor J, Branco BC, Chung J, et al. Outcome comparison between open 
and endovascular management of TASC II D aortoiliac occlusive disease. 
Ann Vasc Surg. 2019;61:65–71.e3.
9.3.3. Porcelain Aorta
 1. Eisen A, Tenenbaum A, Koren-Morag N, et al. Calcification of the thoracic 
aorta as detected by spiral computed tomography among stable angina 
pectoris patients: association with cardiovascular events and death. Circula-
tion. 2008;118:1328–1334.
 2. Mills NL, Everson CT. Atherosclerosis of the ascending aorta and coronary 
artery bypass. Pathology, clinical correlates, and operative management. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991;102:546–553.
 3. Lev-Ran O, Ben-Gal Y, Matsa M, et al. ‘No touch’ techniques for porcelain 
ascending aorta: comparison between cardiopulmonary bypass with femoral 
artery cannulation and off-pump myocardial revascularization. J Card Surg. 
2002;17:370–376.
 4. Sirin G, Sarkislali K, Konakci M, et al. Extraanatomical coronary artery by-
pass grafting in patients with severely atherosclerotic (porcelain) aorta. J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;8:86.
 5. Greelish JP, Soltesz EG, Byrne JG. Valve surgery in octogenarians with a 
“porcelain” aorta and aortic insufficiency. J Card Surg. 2002;17:285–288.
 6. Girardi LN, Krieger KH, Mack CA, et al. No-clamp technique for valve re-
pair or replacement in patients with a porcelain aorta. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2005;80:1688–1692.
9.4. Coarctation of the Aorta (CoA) and Congenital 
Abnormalities of the Arch
 1. Hoffman JI, Kaplan S. The incidence of congenital heart disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2002;39:1890–1900.
 2. Muzzarelli S, Meadows AK, Ordovas KG, et al. Usefulness of cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance imaging to predict the need for intervention in patients 
with coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:861–865.
 3. Teo LL, Cannell T, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. Prevalence of associated car-
diovascular abnormalities in 500 patients with aortic coarctation referred 
for cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging to a tertiary center. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2011;32:1120–1127 .
 4. Attenhofer Jost CH, Schaff HV, Connolly HM, et al. Spectrum of reop-
erations after repair of aortic coarctation: importance of an individualized 
approach because of coexistent cardiovascular disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2002;77:646–653.
 5. Erben Y, Oderich GS, Verhagen HJM, et al. Multicenter experience 
with endovascular treatment of aortic coarctation in adults. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;69:671–679.e1.
 6. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for 
the management of adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e698–e800.
 7 . Carr JA. The results of catheter-based therapy compared with surgical re-
pair of adult aortic coarctation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1101–1107 .
 8. Lala S, Scali ST, Feezor RJ, et al. Outcomes of thoracic endovascular 
aortic repair in adult coarctation patients. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:369–381.
e2.
 9. Meadows J, Minahan M, McElhinney DB, et al. Intermediate outcomes in 
the prospective, multicenter Coarctation of the Aorta Stent Trial (COAST). 
Circulation. 2015;131:1656–1664.
 10. Roselli EE, Qureshi A, Idrees J, et al. Open, hybrid, and endovascular treat-
ment for aortic coarctation and postrepair aneurysm in adolescents and 
adults. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:751–756; discussion 757–758.
 11. Taggart NW, Minahan M, Cabalka AK, et al. Immediate outcomes of cov-
ered stent placement for treatment or prevention of aortic wall injury as-
sociated with coarctation of the aorta (COAST II). JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2016;9:484–493.
 12. Egbe AC, Miranda WR, Bonnichsen CR, et al. Potential benefits of ambula-
tory blood pressure monitoring in coarctation of aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;75:2089–2090.
 13. Meijs TA, Warmerdam EG, Slieker MG, et al. Medium-term systemic blood 
pressure after stenting of aortic coarctation: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Heart. 2019;105:1464–1470.
 14. Puranik R, Tsang VT, Puranik S, et al. Late magnetic resonance surveillance 
of repaired coarctation of the aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;36:91–
95; discussion 95.
 15.  Karangelis D, Loggos S, Tzifa A, et al. The aberrant subclavian artery: ap-
proach to management. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2020;35:636–642.
 16. Plotkin A, Ng B, Han SM, et al. Association of aberrant subclavian arter-
ies with aortic pathology and proposed classification system. J Vasc Surg. 
2020;72:1534–1543.
 17 . Priya S, Thomas R, Nagpal P, et al. Congenital anomalies of the aortic arch. 
Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2018;8(suppl 1):S26–S44.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e474
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 18. Tanaka A, Milner R, Ota T. Kommerell’s diverticulum in the current era: a 
comprehensive review. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;63:245–259.
 19. Kim KM, Cambria RP, Isselbacher EM, et al. Contemporary surgical ap-
proaches and outcomes in adults with Kommerell diverticulum. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2014;98:1347–1354.
 20. Kouchoukos NT, Masetti P. Aberrant subclavian artery and Kommerell an-
eurysm: surgical treatment with a standard approach. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2007;133:888–892.
9.4.1. Coarctation of the Aorta
 1. Brown ML, Burkhart HM, Connolly HM, et al. Coarctation of the aorta: life-
long surveillance is mandatory following surgical repair. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;62:1020–1025.
 2. Erben Y, Oderich GS, Verhagen HJM, et al. Multicenter experience 
with endovascular treatment of aortic coarctation in adults. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;69:671–679.e1.
 3. Meadows J, Minahan M, McElhinney DB, et al. Intermediate outcomes in 
the prospective, multicenter Coarctation of the Aorta Stent Trial (COAST). 
Circulation. 2015;131:1656–1664.
 4. Teo LL, Cannell T, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. Prevalence of associated car-
diovascular abnormalities in 500 patients with aortic coarctation referred 
for cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging to a tertiary center. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2011;32:1120–1127 .
 5. Carr JA. The results of catheter-based therapy compared with surgical re-
pair of adult aortic coarctation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1101-1107 .
 6. Hager A, Kanz S, Kaemmerer H, et al. Coarctation Long-term Assessment 
(COALA): significance of arterial hypertension in a cohort of 404 patients 
up to 27 years after surgical repair of isolated coarctation of the aorta, even 
in the absence of restenosis and prosthetic material. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2007;134:738-745.
 7 . Holzer R, Qureshi S, Ghasemi A, et al. Stenting of aortic coarctation: acute, 
intermediate, and long-term results of a prospective multi-institutional reg-
istry-Congenital Cardiovascular Interventional Study Consortium (CCISC). 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2010;76:553–563.
 8. Kaushal S, Backer CL, Patel JN, et al. Coarctation of the aorta: midterm 
outcomes of resection with extended end-to-end anastomosis. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2009;88:1932–1938.
 9. Lala S, Scali ST, Feezor RJ, et al. Outcomes of thoracic endovascular aortic 
repair in adult coarctation patients. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:369–381.e2.
 10. Sohrabi B, Jamshidi P, Yaghoubi A, et al. Comparison between covered and 
bare Cheatham-Platinum stents for endovascular treatment of patients with 
native post-ductal aortic coarctation: immediate and intermediate-term re-
sults. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2014;7:416–423.
 11. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for 
the management of adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e698–e800.
 12. Taggart NW, Minahan M, Cabalka AK, et al. Immediate outcomes of cov -
ered stent placement for treatment or prevention of aortic wall injury as-
sociated with coarctation of the aorta (COAST II). J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 
2016;9:484–493.
 13. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:1269–1324.
 14. Connolly HM, Huston J 3rd, Brown RD Jr, et al. Intracranial aneurysms 
in patients with coarctation of the aorta: a prospective magnetic resonance 
angiographic study of 100 patients. Mayo Clin Proc. 2003;78:1491–1499.
 15. Cook SC, Hickey J, Maul TM, et al. Assessment of the cerebral circulation in 
adults with coarctation of the aorta. Congenit Heart Dis. 2013;8:289–295.
 16. Curtis SL, Bradley M, Wilde P, et al. Results of screening for intracranial 
aneurysms in patients with coarctation of the aorta. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2012;33:1182–1186.
 17 . Pickard SS, Prakash A, Newburger JW, et al. Screening for intracranial 
aneurysms in coarctation of the aorta: a decision and cost-effectiveness 
analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2020;13:e006406.
 18. Andrade L, Hoskoppal A, Hunt Martin M, et al. Intracranial aneurysm and 
coarctation of the aorta: prevalence in the current era. Cardiol Young. 
2021;31:229–232.
 19. Attenhofer Jost CH, Schaff HV, Connolly HM, et al. Spectrum of reop-
erations after repair of aortic coarctation: importance of an individualized 
approach because of coexistent cardiovascular disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2002;77:646–653.
 20. Oliver JM, Alonso-Gonzalez R, Gonzalez AE, et al. Risk of aortic root or 
ascending aorta complications in patients with bicuspid aortic valve with 
and without coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1001– 
1006.
 21. Fawzy ME, Fathala A, Osman A, et al. Twenty-two years of follow-up results 
of balloon angioplasty for discreet native coarctation of the aorta in adoles-
cents and adults. Am Heart J. 2008;156:910–917 .
 22. Egbe AC, Miranda WR, Bonnichsen CR, et al. Potential benefits of ambula-
tory blood pressure monitoring in coarctation of aorta. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;75:2089–2090.
 23. Luitingh TL, Lee MGY, Jones B, et al. A cross-sectional study of the preva-
lence of exercise-induced hypertension in childhood following repair of co-
arctation of the aorta. Heart Lung Circ. 2019;28:792–799.
 24. Meijs TA, Warmerdam EG, Slieker MG, et al. Medium-term systemic blood 
pressure after stenting of aortic coarctation: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Heart. 2019;105:1464–1470.
 25. Muzzarelli S, Meadows AK, Ordovas KG, et al. Usefulness of cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance imaging to predict the need for intervention in patients 
with coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:861–865.
 26. Preventza O, Livesay JJ, Cooley DA, et al. Coarctation-associated an-
eurysms: a localized disease or diffuse aortopathy. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95:1961–1967; discussion 1967 .
 27 . Therrien J, Thorne SA, Wright A, et al. Repaired coarctation: a “cost-
effective” approach to identify complications in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;35:997–1002.
 28. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 29. Roselli EE, Qureshi A, Idrees J, et al. Open, hybrid, and endovascular treat-
ment for aortic coarctation and postrepair aneurysm in adolescents and 
adults. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:751–756; discussion 757–758.
 30. Kim YY, Andrade L, Cook SC. Aortic coarctation. Cardiol Clin. 2020;38:337–
351.
9.4.2.1. ASCA, Kommerell’s Diverticulum
 1. Dumfarth J, Chou AS, Ziganshin BA, et al. Atypical aortic arch branching 
variants: a novel marker for thoracic aortic disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2015;149:1586–1592.
 2. Yousef S, Singh S, Alkukhun A, et al. Variants of the aortic arch in adult gen-
eral population and their association with thoracic aortic aneurysm disease. 
J Card Surg. 2021;36:2348–2354.
 3. Tanaka A, Milner R, Ota T. Kommerell’s diverticulum in the current era: a 
comprehensive review. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;63:245–259.
 4. Upchurch GR Jr, Escobar GA, Azizzdeh A, et al. Society for Vascular Sur-
gery clinical practice guidelines of thoracic endovascular aortic repair for 
descending thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:55S–83S.
 5. Vinnakota A, Idrees JJ, Rosinski BF, et al. Outcomes of repair of Kommerell 
diverticulum. Ann Thorac Surg. 2019;108:1745–1750.
 6. Idrees J, Arafat A, Svensson LG, et al. Hybrid repair of aortic aneurysm in pa-
tients with previous coarctation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:60–64.
 7 . Czerny M, Schmidli J, Adler S, et al. Editor’s choice - current options and 
recommendations for the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologies involving 
the aortic arch: an expert consensus document of the European Association 
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS) & the European Society for Vascular 
Surgery (ESVS). Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2019;57:165–198.
 8. Erben Y, Brownstein AJ, Velasquez CA, et al. Natural history and manage-
ment of Kommerell’s diverticulum in a single tertiary referral center. J Vasc 
Surg. 2020;71:2004–2011.
9.4.2.2. Aberrant Left Vertebral Artery Origin
 1. Magklara EP, Pantelia ET, Solia E, et al. Vertebral artery variations revised: 
origin, course, branches and embryonic development. Folia Morphol (Warsz). 
2021;80:1–12.
 2. Rylski B, Schofer F, Beyersdorf F, et al. Aortic arch anatomy in candi-
dates for aortic arch repair. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;S1043–
0679:00113–1.
 3. Rangel-Castilla L, Kalani MY, Cronk K, et al. Vertebral artery transposi-
tion for revascularization of the posterior circulation: a critical assessment 
of temporary and permanent complications and outcomes. J Neurosurg. 
2015;122:671–677 .
 4. Suzuki K, Kazui T, Bashar AH, et al. Total aortic arch replacement in patients 
with arch vessel anomalies. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:2079–2083.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e475
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 5. Cooper DG, Walsh SR, Sadat U, et al. Neurological complications after left 
subclavian artery coverage during thoracic endovascular aortic repair: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Vasc Surg. 2009;49:1594–1601.
 6. Buth J, Harris PL, Hobo R, et al. Neurologic complications associated 
with endovascular repair of thoracic aortic pathology: Incidence and risk 
factors. a study from the European Collaborators on Stent/Graft Tech-
niques for Aortic Aneurysm Repair (EUROSTAR) registry. J Vasc Surg. 
2007;46:1103–1110; discussion 1110–1111.
 7 . Waterford SD, Chou D, Bombien R, et al. Left subclavian arterial coverage 
and stroke during thoracic aortic endografting: a systematic review. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2016;101:381–389.
 8. von Allmen RS, Gahl B, Powell JT. Editor’s choice - incidence of stroke fol-
lowing thoracic endovascular aortic repair for descending aortic aneurysm: 
a systematic review of the literature with meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endo-
vasc Surg. 2017;53:176–184.
9.4.2.3. Bovine Arch (Common Innominate and Left Carotid 
Artery)
 1. Hornick M, Moomiaie R, Mojibian H, et al. ‘Bovine’ aortic arch - a marker for 
thoracic aortic disease. Cardiology. 2012;123:116–124.
 2. Wanamaker KM, Amadi CC, Mueller JS, et al. Incidence of aortic arch anom-
alies in patients with thoracic aortic dissections. J Card Surg. 2013;28:151–
154.
 3. Marrocco-Trischitta MM, Alaidroos M, Romarowski RM, et al. Aortic arch 
variant with a common origin of the innominate and left carotid artery as 
a determinant of thoracic aortic disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;57:422–427 .
 4. Berko NS, Jain VR, Godelman A, et al. Variants and anomalies of thoracic 
vasculature on computed tomographic angiography in adults. J Comput As-
sist Tomogr. 2009;33:523–528.
 5. Layton KF, Kallmes DF, Cloft HJ, et al. Bovine aortic arch variant in hu-
mans: clarification of a common misnomer. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2006;27:1541–1542.
 6. Ye W, Zheng C, Yu D, et al. Lipoxin A4 ameliorates acute pancreatitis-
associated acute lung injury through the antioxidative and anti-inflammatory 
effects of the Nrf2 pathway. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2019;2019:2197017 .
 7 . Dumfarth J, Peterss S, Kofler M, et al. In DeBakey type I aortic dissection, 
bovine aortic arch is associated with arch tears and stroke. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2017;104:2001–2008.
9.5. Tumors
 1. Diaconu R, Florescu R, Cornelissen A, et al. An unusual case of aortic me-
tastasis from lung cancer. Discoveries (Craiova). 2020;8:e106.
 2. Lloyd C, Silvestri GA. Mediastinal staging of non-small-cell lung cancer. 
Cancer Control. 2001;8:311–317 .
 3. Rusthoven CG, Liu AK, Bui MM, et al. Sarcomas of the aorta: a system-
atic review and pooled analysis of published reports. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2014;28:515–525.
 4. Fatima J, Duncan AA, Maleszewski JJ, et al. Primary angiosarcoma of the 
aorta, great vessels, and the heart. J Vasc Surg. 2013;57:756–764.
 5. Bohner H, Luther B, Braunstein S, et al. Primary malignant tumors of the 
aorta: clinical presentation, treatment, and course of different entities. J 
Vasc Surg. 2003;38:1430–1433.
 6. Vacirca A, Faggioli G, Pini R, et al. Predictors of survival in malignant aortic 
tumors. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:e100.
 7 . Chiche L, Mongredien B, Brocheriou I, et al. Primary tumors of the thora-
coabdominal aorta: surgical treatment of 5 patients and review of the litera-
ture. Ann Vasc Surg. 2003;17:354–364.
 8. Salm R. Primary fibrosarcoma of aorta. Cancer. 1972;29:73–83.
 9. Bendel EC, Maleszewski JJ, Araoz PA. Imaging sarcomas of the great ves-
sels and heart. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2011;32:377–404.
 10. von Falck C, Meyer B, Fegbeutel C, et al. Imaging features of primary sar-
comas of the great vessels in CT, MRI and PET/CT: a single-center experi-
ence. BMC Med Imaging. 2013;13:25.
10. Physical Activity and Quality of Life
 1. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno -
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 2. Thijssen CGE, Bons LR, Gokalp AL, et al. Exercise and sports participation 
in patients with thoracic aortic disease: a review. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 
2019;17:251–266.
 3. Fuglsang S, Heiberg J, Hjortdal VE, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilita-
tion in surgically treated type-A aortic dissection patients. Scand Cardiovasc 
J. 2017;51:99–105.
 4. Hornsby WE, Norton EL, Fink S, et al. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
following open repair for a proximal thoracic aortic aneurysm or dissection. 
J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2020;40:108–115.
 5. Chaddha A, Eagle KA, Braverman AC, et al. Exercise and physical activity 
for the post-aortic dissection patient: the clinician’s conundrum. Clin Cardiol. 
2015;38:647–651.
 6. Chaddha A, Kline-Rogers E, Woznicki EM, et al. Cardiology patient page. 
Activity recommendations for postaortic dissection patients. Circulation. 
2014;130:e140–e142.
 7 . Franke UFW, Isecke A, Nagib R, et al. Quality of life after aortic root surgery: 
reimplantation technique versus composite replacement. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2010;90:1869–1875.
 8. Pasadyn SR, Roselli EE, Artis AS, et al. From tear to fear: posttraumatic 
stress disorder in patients with acute type A aortic dissection. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2020;9:e015060.
 9. Chaddha A, Kline-Rogers E, Braverman AC, et al. Survivors of aortic dissection: 
activity, mental health, and sexual function. Clin Cardiol. 2015;38:652–659.
 10. Coughlin PA, Jackson D, White AD, et al. Meta-analysis of prospective tri-
als determining the short- and mid-term effect of elective open and endo-
vascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms on quality of life. Br J Surg. 
2013;100:448–455.
 11. Lohse F, Lang N, Schiller W, et al. Quality of life after replacement of 
the ascending aorta in patients with true aneurysms. Tex Heart Inst J. 
2009;36:104–110.
 12. de Heer F, Gokalp AL, Kluin J, et al. Measuring what matters to the patient: 
health related quality of life after aortic valve and thoracic aortic surgery. 
Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019;67:37–43.
 13. Duncan R, Essat M, Jones G, et al. Systematic review and qualitative evi-
dence synthesis of patient-reported outcome measures for abdominal aor-
tic aneurysm. Br J Surg. 2017;104:317–327 .
 14. Gokalp AL, Takkenberg JJM. Decision-making in thoracic aortic aneu-
rysm surgery-clinician and patient view. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2019;31:638–642.
 15. Tan MK, Jarral OA, Thong EH, et al. Quality of life after mitral valve interven-
tion. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2017;24:265–272.
 16. Peach G, Romaine J, Wilson A, et al. Design of new patient-reported outcome 
measures to assess quality of life, symptoms and treatment satisfaction in 
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm. Br J Surg. 2016;103:1003–1011.
 17 . Brady AR, Thompson SG, Fowkes FG, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysm 
expansion: risk factors and time intervals for surveillance. Circulation. 
2004;110:16–21.
 18. Badger SA, Jones C, McClements J, et al. Surveillance strategies accord-
ing to the rate of growth of small abdominal aortic aneurysms. Vasc Med. 
2011;16:415–421.
 19. Bown MJ, Sweeting MJ, et al. RESCAN Collaborators, Surveillance in-
tervals for small abdominal aortic aneurysms: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2013;309:806–813.
 20. Lomazzi C, Mascoli C, de Beaufort HWL, et al. Gender related access com-
plications after TEVAR: analysis from the Retrospective Multicentre Cohort 
GORE® GREAT Registry Study. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2020;60:203–
209.
 21. Hendy K, Gunnarson R, Golledge J. Growth rates of small abdominal aortic 
aneurysms assessed by computerised tomography-a systematic literature 
review. Atherosclerosis. 2014;235:182–188.
 22. Oliver-Williams C, Sweeting MJ, Jacomelli J, et al. Safety of men with small 
and medium abdominal aortic aneurysms under surveillance in the NAAASP. 
Circulation. 2019;139:1371–1380.
 23. Maron BJ, Chaitman BR, Ackerman MJ, et al. Recommendations for physi-
cal activity and recreational sports participation for young patients with ge-
netic cardiovascular diseases. Circulation. 2004;109:2807–2816.
 24. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 25. Erbel R, Aboyans V, Boileau C, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagno-
sis and treatment of aortic diseases: document covering acute and chronic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106e476
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
aortic diseases of the thoracic and abdominal aorta of the adult. The Task 
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Aortic Diseases of the European 
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2873–2926.
 26. Cheng A, Owens D. Marfan syndrome, inherited aortopathies and exercise: 
what is the right answer? Heart. 2015;101:752–757 .
 27 . Delsart P, Maldonado-Kauffmann P, Bic M, et al. Post aortic dissection: gap 
between activity recommendation and real life patients aerobic capacities. 
Int J Cardiol. 2016;219:271–276.
 28. Nakayama A, Morita H, Nagayama M, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation protects 
against the expansion of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2018;7:e007959.
 29. Hatzaras IS, Bible JE, Koullias GJ, et al. Role of exertion or emotion as incit-
ing events for acute aortic dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1470–1472.
 30. Ulug P, Powell JT, Warschkow R, et al. Editor’s choice - sex specific differenc-
es in the management of descending thoracic aortic aneurysms: systematic 
review with meta-analysis. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2019;58:503–511.
 31. Marcaccio CL, Schermerhorn ML. Epidemiology of abdominal aortic aneu-
rysms. Semin Vasc Surg. 2021;34:29–37 .
 32. Thompson S, Brown L, Sweeting M, et al. Systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis of the growth and rupture rates of small abdominal aortic aneurysms: 
implications for surveillance intervals and their cost-effectiveness. Health 
Technol Assess. 2013;17:1–118.
 33. Salehi Ravesh M, Langguth P, Pfarr JA, et al. Non-contrast-enhanced mag-
netic resonance imaging for visualization and quantification of endovascular 
aortic prosthesis, their endoleaks and aneurysm sacs at 1.5T. Magn Reson 
Imaging. 2019;60:164–172.
 34. Kawada H, Goshima S, Sakurai K, et al. Utility of noncontrast magnetic reso-
nance angiography for aneurysm follow-up and detection of endoleaks after 
endovascular aortic repair. Korean J Radiol. 2021;22:513–524.
 35. Fairman AS, Beck AW, Malas MB, et al. Reinterventions in the modern era of 
thoracic endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2020;71:408–422.
 36. Coselli JS, Bozinovski J, LeMaire SA. Open surgical repair of 2286 tho-
racoabdominal aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:S862–S864; 
discussion S890–S892.
 37 . Aune D, Sen A, Kobeissi E, et al. Physical activity and the risk of abdominal 
aortic aneurysm: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective stud-
ies. Sci Rep. 2020;10:22287 .
 38. Mas-Stachurska A, Siegert AM, Batlle M, et al. Cardiovascular benefits of 
moderate exercise training in Marfan syndrome: insights from an animal 
model. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e006438.
 39. Gibson C, Nielsen C, Alex R, et al. Mild aerobic exercise blocks elastin fiber 
fragmentation and aortic dilatation in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome 
associated aortic aneurysm. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2017;123:147-160.
 40. Thijssen CGE, Dekker S, Bons LR, et al. Health-related quality of life and 
lived experiences in males and females with thoracic aortic disease and 
their partners. Open Heart. 2020;7:e001419.
 41. Jarral OA, Kidher E, Patel VM, et al. Quality of life after intervention on the 
thoracic aorta. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2016;49:369–389.
11. Cost and Value Considerations
 1. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 2. Thompson SG, Ashton HA, Gao L, et al. Screening men for abdominal 
aortic aneurysm: 10 year mortality and cost effectiveness results from 
the randomised Multicentre Aneurysm Screening Study. BMJ. 2009;338: 
b2307 .
 3. Zarrouk M, Lundqvist A, Holst J, et al. Cost-effectiveness of screening for 
abdominal aortic aneurysm in combination with medical intervention in pa-
tients with small aneurysms. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2016;51:766–773.
 4. Wanhainen A, Lundkvist J, Bergqvist D, et al. Cost-effectiveness of screen-
ing women for abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 2006;43:908–914; 
discussion 914.
 5. Nargesi S, Abutorabi A, Alipour V, et al. Cost-effectiveness of endovascular 
versus open repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm: a systematic review. Car-
diovasc Drugs Ther. 2021;35:829–839.
 6. Trooboff SW, Wanken ZJ, Gladders B, et al. Longitudinal spending on endo-
vascular and open abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes. 2020;13:e006249.
 7 . Ulug P, Hinchliffe RJ, Sweeting MJ, et al. Strategy of endovascular versus 
open repair for patients with clinical diagnosis of ruptured abdominal aortic 
aneurysm: the IMPROVE RCT. Health Technol Assess. 2018;22:1–122.
 8. IMPROVE Trial Investigators. Comparative clinical effectiveness and cost 
effectiveness of endovascular strategy v open repair for ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm: three year results of the IMPROVE randomised trial. BMJ. 
2017;359:j4859.
 9. Stroupe KT, Lederle FA, Matsumura JS, et al. Cost-effectiveness of open 
versus endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm in the OVER trial. 
J Vasc Surg. 2012;56:901–909.e902.
 10. Epstein D, Sculpher MJ, Powell JT, et al. Long-term cost-effectiveness 
analysis of endovascular versus open repair for abdominal aortic aneurysm 
based on four randomized clinical trials. Br J Surg. 2014;101:623–631.
 11. van Bochove CA, Burgers L T, Vahl AC, et al. Cost-effectiveness of open 
versus endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc Surg. 
2016;63:827–838.e822.
 12. Arnaoutakis GJ, Hundt JA, Shah AS, et al. Comparative analysis of hospital 
costs of open and endovascular thoracic aortic repair. Vasc Endovascular 
Surg. 2011;45:39–45.
 13. Gillen JR, Schaheen BW, Yount KW, et al. Cost analysis of endovascular 
versus open repair in the treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms. J Vasc 
Surg. 2015;61:596–603.
 14. Locham S, Dakour-Aridi H, Nejim B, et al. Outcomes and cost of open ver-
sus endovascular repair of intact thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm. J Vasc 
Surg. 2018;68:948–955.e1.
 15. McClure RS, Brogly SB, Lajkosz K, et al. Economic burden and health-
care resource use for thoracic aortic dissections and thoracic aortic an-
eurysms-a population-based cost-of-illness analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2020;9:e014981.
12.1. Biomarker Studies
 1. Girdauskas E, Petersen J, Neumann N, et al. Novel approaches for BAV 
aortopathy prediction-is there a need for cohort studies and biomarkers? 
Biomolecules. 2018;8:58.
 2. Bai W, Suzuki H, Huang J, et al. A population-based phenome-wide as-
sociation study of cardiac and aortic structure and function. Nat Med. 
2020;26:1654–1662.
 3. Lesiak M, Augusciak-Duma A, Stepien KL, et al. Searching for new molecu-
lar markers for cells obtained from abdominal aortic aneurysm. J Appl Genet. 
2021;62:487–497 .
 4. Maredia AK, Greenway SC, Verma S, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve-associated 
aortopathy: update on biomarkers. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2018;33:134–139.
 5. Michelena HI, Della Corte A, Evangelista A, et al. International consensus 
statement on nomenclature and classification of the congenital bicuspid 
aortic valve and its aortopathy, for clinical, surgical, interventional and re-
search purposes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2021;112:e203–e235.
 6. Portelli SS, Robertson EN, Malecki C, et al. Epigenetic influences on ge-
netically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysm. Biophys Rev. 2018;10:1241–
1256.
 7 . Zhu S, Zhu K, Li J, et al. Nano-biomaterials for the delivery of therapeu-
tic and monitoring cues for aortic diseases. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 
2020;8:583879.
12.2. Genetic and Nongenetic Factors
 1. Ashvetiya T, Fan SX, Chen Y J, et al. Identification of novel genetic susceptibil-
ity loci for thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms via genome-wide asso-
ciation study using the UK Biobank Cohort. PLoS One. 2021;16:e0247287 .
 2. Faggion Vinholo T, Zafar MA, Ziganshin BA, et al. Nonsyndromic thoracic 
aortic aneurysms and dissections-is screening possible? Semin Thorac Car-
diovasc Surg. 2019;31:628–634.
 3. Kaluza J, Stackelberg O, Harris HR, et al. Mediterranean diet is associated 
with reduced risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm in smokers: results of two 
prospective cohort studies. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2021;62:284–293.
 4. Kaluza J, Stackelberg O, Harris HR, et al. Anti-inflammatory diet and risk of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm in two Swedish cohorts. Heart. 2019;105:1876–
1883.
 5. Lai CC, Lu CT, Kao KC, et al. Association of fluoroquinolones use with the 
risk of aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection: facts and myths. J Microbiol Im-
munol Infect. 2021;54:182–184.
 6. Milewicz DM, Regalado ES. Use of genetics for personalized management 
of heritable thoracic aortic disease: how do we get there? J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2015;149:S3–S5.
 7 . Mordi IR, Forsythe RO, Gellatly C, et al. Plasma desmosine and abdominal 
aortic aneurysm disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e013743.
 8. Newton ER, Akerman AW, Strassle PD, et al. Association of fluoroquinolone 
use with short-term risk of development of aortic aneurysm. JAMA Surg. 
2021;156:264–272.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e477
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
 9. Stackelberg O, Bjorck M, Larsson SC, et al. Fruit and vegetable consumption 
with risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Circulation. 2013;128:795–802.
 10. Stackelberg O, Bjorck M, Larsson SC, et al. Alcohol consumption, spe-
cific alcoholic beverages, and abdominal aortic aneurysm. Circulation. 
2014;130:646–652.
12.3. Biomechanics of the Aorta
 1. Cebull HL, Rayz VL, Goergen CJ. Recent advances in biomechanical char-
acterization of thoracic aortic aneurysms. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2020; 
7:75.
 2. Xuan Y, Wisneski AD, Wang Z, et al. Regional biomechanical and failure 
properties of healthy human ascending aorta and root. J Mech Behav 
Biomed Mater. 2021;123:104705.
 3. Xuan Y, Wang Z, Liu R, et al. Wall stress on ascending thoracic aortic aneu-
rysms with bicuspid compared with tricuspid aortic valve. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2018;156:492–500.
 4. Xuan Y, D’Souza SN, Wang Z, et al. Patient-specific biomechanics in Mar-
fan ascending thoracic aortic aneurysms. Ann Thorac Surg. Published online 
August 17 , 2021. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2021.07 .042
12.4. Sex, Race, and Ethnicity
 1. Chen JF, Zafar MA, Wu J, et al. Increased virulence of descending tho-
racic and thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms in women. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2021;112:45–52.
 2. Cheung K, Boodhwani M, Chan KL, et al. Thoracic aortic aneurysm growth: 
role of sex and aneurysm etiology. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e003792.
 3. Chou EL, Pettinger M, Haring B, et al. Association of premature meno-
pause with risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm in the Women’s Health 
Initiative. Ann Surg. Published online November 4, 2020. doi:10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004581.
 4. Deery SE, Soden PA, Zettervall SL, et al. Sex differences in mortality and 
morbidity following repair of intact abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2017;65:1006–1013.
 5. Lo RC, Schermerhorn ML. Abdominal aortic aneurysms in women. J Vasc 
Surg. 2016;63:839–844.
 6. Nicolini F, Vezzani A, Corradi F, et al. Gender differences in outcomes af-
ter aortic aneurysm surgery should foster further research to improve 
screening and prevention programmes. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2018;25: 
32–41.
 7 . Nienaber CA, Fattori R, Mehta RH, et al. Gender-related differences in acute 
aortic dissection. Circulation. 2004;109:3014–3021.
 8. Olson SL, Wijesinha MA, Panthofer AM, et al. Evaluating growth patterns 
of abdominal aortic aneurysm diameter with serial computed tomography 
surveillance. JAMA Surg. 2021;156:363–370.
 9. Preventza O, Cekmecelioglu D, Chatterjee S, et al. Sex differences in as-
cending aortic and arch surgery: a propensity-matched comparison of 1153 
pairs. Ann Thorac Surg. 2022;113:1153–1158.
 10. Rylski B, Georgieva N, Beyersdorf F, et al. Gender-related differences in 
patients with acute aortic dissection type A. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2021;162:528–535.e1.
 11. Spiliotopoulos K, Price MD, Amarasekara HS, et al. Are outcomes of thora-
coabdominal aortic aneurysm repair different in men versus women? A pro-
pensity-matched comparison. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2017;154:1203–
1214.e1206.
 12. Tomee SM, Lijftogt N, Vahl A, et al. A registry-based rationale for discrete 
intervention thresholds for open and endovascular elective abdominal aortic 
aneurysm repair in female patients. J Vasc Surg. 2018;67:735–739.
 13. Tumer NB, Askin G, Akkaya BB, et al. Outcomes after EVAR in females are 
similar to males. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2021;21:301.
 14. Vervoort D, Canner JK, Haut ER, et al. Racial disparities associated with 
reinterventions after elective endovascular aortic aneurysm repair. J Surg 
Res. 2021;268:381–388.
 15. Yang Y, Lehman EB, Aziz F. African Americans are less likely to have 
elective endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2019;70:462–470.
 16. Yin K, AlHajri N, Rizwan M, et al. Black patients have a higher burden of 
comorbidities but a lower risk of 30-day and 1-year mortality after thoracic 
endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg. 2021;73:2071–2080.e2.
 17 . Cho L, Kibbe MR, Bakaeen F, et al. Cardiac Surgery in Women in the 
Current Era: What Are the Gaps in Care? Circulation. 2021;144:1172– 
1185.
 18. Mayor JM, Preventza O, McGinigle K, et al. Persistent under-representation 
of female patients in United States trials of common vascular diseases from 
2008 to 2020. J Vasc Surg. 2022;75:30–36.
 19. Preventza O, Critsinelis A, Simpson K, et al. Sex, racial, and ethnic dispari-
ties in U.S. cardiovascular trials in more than 230, 000 patients. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2021;112:726–735.
12.5. Quality of Life in Patients With Aortic Disease
 1. Archer S, Pinto A, Vuik S, et al. Surgery, complications, and quality of life: 
a longitudinal cohort study exploring the role of psychosocial factors. Ann 
Surg. 2019;270:95–101.
 2. Blakeslee-Carter J, Menon AJ, Novak Z, et al. Association of mental health 
disorders and aortic dissection. Ann Vasc Surg. 2021;77:217–225.
 3. Ghanta RK, Green SY, Price MD, et al. Midterm survival and quality of life af-
ter extent II thoracoabdominal aortic repair in Marfan syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2016;101:1402–1409; discussion 1409.
 4. Luo ZR, Liao DS, Chen LW. Comparative analysis of postoperative sexual 
dysfunction and quality of life in type A aortic dissection patients of different 
ages. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2021;16:117 .
 5. Nilsson O, Stenman M, Letterstal A, et al. A randomized clinical trial of an 
eHealth intervention on anxiety in patients undergoing abdominal aortic an-
eurysm surgery. Br J Surg. 2021;108:917–924.
 6. Smolock CJ, Xiang F, Roselli EE, et al. Health-related quality of life after 
extensive aortic replacement. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2021;S1043–
0679:00318–X.
 7 . Thijssen CGE, Doze DE, Gokalp AL, et al. Male-female differences in qual-
ity of life and coping style in patients with Marfan syndrome and hereditary 
thoracic aortic diseases. J Genet Couns. 2020;29:1259–1269.
 8. Velvin G, Wilhelmsen JE, Johansen H, et al. Systematic review of quality 
of life in persons with hereditary thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection 
diagnoses. Clin Genet. 2019;95:661–676.
12.6. New Endovascular Technology
 1. Czerny M, Rylski B, Morlock J, et al. Orthotopic branched endovascular 
aortic arch repair in patients who cannot undergo classical surgery. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;53:1007–1012.
 2. D’Onofrio A, Cibin G, Antonello M, et al. Endovascular exclusion of the entire 
aortic arch with branched stent-grafts after surgery for acute type A aortic 
dissection. JTCVS Tech. 2020;3:1–8.
 3. Haulon S, Greenberg RK, Spear R, et al. Global experience with an inner 
branched arch endograft. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014;148:1709– 
1716.
 4. Kan X, Ma T, Lin J, et al. Patient-specific simulation of stent-graft deploy-
ment in type B aortic dissection: model development and validation. Bio-
mech Model Mechanobiol. 2021;20:2247–2258.
 5. Liu Z, Wu L, Yang J, et al. Thoracic aorta stent grafts design in terms of 
biomechanical investigations into flexibility. Math Biosci Eng. 2020;18:800–
816.
 6. Oderich GS, Tenorio ER, Mendes BC, et al. Midterm outcomes of a pro-
spective, nonrandomized study to evaluate endovascular repair of com-
plex aortic aneurysms using fenestrated-branched endografts. Ann Surg. 
2021;274:491–499.
12.7 . Optimal Exercise and Rehabilitation Protocols
 1. Castaneda-Lopez J, Vasquez-Jimenez C, Medina-Soto L, et al. Cardiac re-
habilitation in a patient with DeBakey IIIb aortic disecction case report and 
literature review. Arch Cardiol Mex. 2020;90:309–312.
 2. DeFabio DC, DeFabio CJ. Exercise parameters for the chronic type B aor-
tic dissection patient: a literature review and case report. Postgrad Med. 
2021;133:217–222.
 3. Delsart P, Maldonado-Kauffmann P, Bic M, et al. Post aortic dissection: gap 
between activity recommendation and real life patients aerobic capacities. 
Int J Cardiol. 2016;219:271–276.
 4. Fuglsang S, Heiberg J, Hjortdal VE, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilita-
tion in surgically treated type-A aortic dissection patients. Scand Cardiovasc 
J. 2017;51:99–105.
12.8. Equitable Care and Training Opportunities
 1. Holscher CM, Weaver ML, Black JH 3rd, et al. Regional market competition 
is associated with aneurysm diameter at the time of EVAR. Ann Vasc Surg. 
2021;70:190–196.
 2. Mullan CW, Mori M, Bin Mahmood SU, et al. Incidence and characteristics of hos-
pitalization for proximal aortic surgery for acute syndromes and for aneurysms 
in the USA from 2005 to 2014. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2020;58:583–589.
 3. Zettervall SL, Buck DB, Soden PA, et al. Regional variation exists in pa-
tient selection and treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms. J Vasc Surg. 
2016;64:921–927 .e1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e478
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Appendix 1. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2022 2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagno-
sis and Management of Aortic Disease
Committee  
Member Employment Consultant
Speakers  
Bureau
Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal
Personal  
Research
Institutional,  
Organizational, 
or Other Finan-
cial Benefit
Expert 
Witness
Eric M. Isselbacher,  
Chair
Massachusetts General Hospi-
tal—Director, Healthcare Trans-
formation Lab; Co-Director, 
MGH Thoracic Aortic Center; 
Harvard Medical School—Asso-
ciate Professor of Medicine
None None None None None None
James Hamilton 
Black III, Vice Chair
Johns Hopkins Medicine—Pro-
fessor of Surgery
None None None None None None
Ourania Preventza, 
Vice Chair
Baylor College of Medicine; 
Baylor St. Luke’s Medical Cen-
ter—Professor of Surgery, Divi-
sion of Cardiothoracic Surgery
• Terumo Aortic 
(Bolton Medical)
• W.L. Gore & 
Associates
None None None None None
John G.  
Augoustides
University of Pennsylvania—Pro-
fessor, Department of Anesthe-
siology and Critical Care
None None None None None None
Adam W. Beck University of Alabama at Bir-
mingham—Professor and Direc-
tor of Vascular Surgery and 
Endovascular Therapy, Depart-
ment of Surgery
• Cook Medical
• Cryolife
• Endologix
• Philips
• Terumo Aortic 
(Bolton Medical)
None None • Cook Medical
• Medtronic
• Terumo Aortic 
(Bolton  
Medical)
• W.L. Gore & 
Associates
None None
Michael A. Bolen Cleveland Clinic, Main Campus—
Associate Professor of Radiol-
ogy, Division of Radiology
None None None None None None
Alan C. Braverman Washington University School 
of Medicine—Alumni Endowed 
Professor in Cardiovascular 
Diseases; Director, Marfan 
Syndrome and Aortopathy 
Clinic Cardiovascular Division, 
Department of Medicine
None None None None None None
Bruce E. Bray University of Utah—Professor, 
Department of Internal Medi-
cine and Biomedical Informatics
None None None None None None
Maya M.  
Brown-Zimmerman
Patient advocate None None None None None None
Edward P. Chen Duke University Medical Cen-
ter—Professor and Division Chief, 
Division of Cardiovascular and 
Thoracic Surgery
None None None • Bolton Medical* • Bolton Medi-
cal†
None
Tyrone J. Collins Ochsner Medical Center—Sec-
tion Head, Interventional Cardiol-
ogy, Co-Director, Cardiac Cathe-
terization Laboratory, Department 
of Interventional Cardiology
• InspireMD None None None • W.L. Gore & 
Associates†
None
Abe DeAnda Jr UTMB-Galveston—Professor 
and Chief, Division of Cardio-
vascular and Thoracic Surgery, 
Division of Surgery
None None None None None None
Christina L. Fanola University of Minnesota—Assis-
tant Professor, Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine
• Janssen Pharma-
ceuticals
None None None None None
Leonard N. Girardi Weill Cornell Medicine—Profes-
sor and Chairman, Department 
of Cardiothoracic Surgery
None None None None None None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e479
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Caitlin W. Hicks Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine—Associate 
Professor of Surgery, Division 
of Surgery
None None None None None None
Dawn S. Hui University of Texas Health San 
Antonio— Associate Professor, 
Department of Cardiothoracic 
Surgery
None None None • Astellas 
Pharma*
None None
William Schuyler 
Jones
Duke University—Associate Pro-
fessor of Medicine & Director of 
Cardiac Catheterization Labo-
ratory, Division of Medicine/
Cardiology
• Bayer‡
• Janssen Pharma-
ceuticals‡
None None • Boehringer 
Ingelheim
• Bristol-Myers 
Squibb
None None
Vidyasagar  
Kalahasti
Cleveland Clinic—Assistant 
Professor, Cleveland Clinic 
Lerner College of Medicine 
of the Case Western Reserve 
University; Director, Marfan 
Syndrome & Connective Tissue 
Disorder Clinic, Aortic Center, 
Heart, Vascular and Thoracic 
Institute
None None None None None None
Karen M. Kim University of Michigan—Assis-
tant Professor, Department of 
Cardiac Surgery
None None None None None None
Dianna M. Milewicz University of Texas Health Sci-
ence Center at Houston—Presi-
dent George H.W. Bush Chair 
of Cardiovascular Medicine 
Vice Chair, Department of Inter-
nal Medicine Director, Division 
of Medical Genetics Director, 
Division of Internal Medicine
None None None None None None
Gustavo S.  
Oderich
The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, 
McGovern Medical School—
Professor of Surgery and Chief 
of Vascular and Endovascular 
Surgery, Director of Aortic 
Center,  Department of Cardio-
Thoracic and Vascular Surgery
• Cook Medical
• GE Healthcare
• W.L. Gore & 
Associates
None None • Cook Medical‡
• GE Health-
care‡
• W.L. Gore & 
Associates‡
• Centerline 
Biomedical, 
Advisory 
Board  
Member*
• Cook  
Medical†
• Philips, Advi-
sory Board 
Member
• W.L. Gore & 
Associates†
None
Laura Ogbechie Baylor College of Medicine—
Nurse Practitioner, Department 
of Cardiothoracic Surgery
None None None None None None
Susan B. Promes Penn State Health Hershey 
Medical Center—Professor and 
Chair‚ Department of Emer-
gency Medicine
None None None None None None
Elsie Gyang Ross Stanford University School of 
Medicine— Assistant Professor, 
Department of Surgery and 
Medicine
None None None None None None
Appendix 1. Continued
Committee  
Member Employment Consultant
Speakers  
Bureau
Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal
Personal  
Research
Institutional,  
Organizational, 
or Other Finan-
cial Benefit
Expert 
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e480
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Marc L.  
Schermerhorn
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center— George H. A. Clowes 
Jr. Professor of Surgery, Chief, 
Division of Vascular and Endo-
vascular Surgery, Department 
of Surgery
None None None None • Medtronic, 
Scientific 
Advisory 
Board  
Member*
• Philips, Sci-
entific Advi-
sory Board 
Member*
None
Sabrina Singleton 
Times§
American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiol-
ogy Guideline Advisor
None None None None None None
Elaine E. Tseng University of California San 
Francisco; San Francisco VA 
Medical Center—Professor of 
Surgery University of California 
San Francisco; Chief of Cardio-
thoracic Surgery, San Francisco 
VA Department of Surgery
None None None None • Cryolife†‡ None
Grace J. Wang University of Pennsylvania Hospi-
tal—Associate Professor of Sur-
gery, Division of Vascular Surgery 
and Endovascular Therapy
None None None None None None
Y. Joseph Woo Stanford University—Chair, Divi-
sion of Cardiothoracic Surgery
None None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. These relation-
ships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. The 
table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant interest in a business if the interest 
represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds 
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are 
also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property 
or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in 
the document or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household, has a reasonable potential for 
financial, professional or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document.
*No financial benefit.
†This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that 
there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
‡Significant relationship.
§Sabrina Singleton Times is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the Guideline Advisor for the “2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Diagnosis and Manage-
ment of Aortic Disease. ” No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting author on measures and not included/counted in the RWI balance for this committee.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; MGH, Massachusetts 
General Hospital; RWI, relationships with industry and other entities; UTMB, University of Texas Medical Branch; and VA, Veterans Affairs.
Appendix 1. Continued
Committee  
Member Employment Consultant
Speakers  
Bureau
Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal
Personal  
Research
Institutional,  
Organizational, 
or Other Finan-
cial Benefit
Expert 
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106 December 13, 2022 e481
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS 
AND GUIDELINES
Appendix 2. Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Comprehensive)—2022 ACC/AHA Guideline for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Aortic Disease
Reviewer Employment Consultant
Speakers 
Bureau
Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research
Institutional, Or-
ganizational, or 
Other Financial 
Benefit
Expert  
Witness
David P. Faxon, 
Peer Review Com-
mittee Chair
Harvard University;
Brigham and Wom-
en’s Hospital
None None • REVA 
Medical
• Boston Scientific 
(DSMB)
• CSL Behring (DSMB)
• Medtronic (DSMB)*
None None
Gilbert R.  
Upchurch Jr, Peer 
Review Commit-
tee Vice Chair
University of Florida 
College of Medicine
None None • Antyllus* • NIH, PI* • Bolton†
• Cook†
• Gore†
• Medtronic†
None
Aaron W. Aday Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center
• OptumCare‡
• TransThera 
Sciences
None None • Janssen 
Pharmaceuti-
cals†
• University of 
Manitoba†
None
Ali Azizzadeh Cedars Sinai None None None None • Gore† None
Michael Boisen 
(representing 
SCA)
University of  
Pittsburgh
None None None None None None
Mohammad H. 
Eslami (represent-
ing SVS)
University of  
Pittsburgh
None None None None None None
Beau Hawkins 
(representing 
SVM)
The University of 
Oklahoma College 
of Medicine
• Baim Institute 
for Clinical 
Research
None None None • Behring†
• Boston  
Scientific†
• Hemostemix†
• NIH†
None
Christopher M. 
Kramer
University of Virginia • Bristol Myers 
Squibb‡
• Cytokinetics
• Eli Lilly
• Xencor
None None • NHLBI‡
• NIBIB‡
• Cytokinetics†
• MyoKardia†
None
Jessica G. Y. Luc University of British 
Columbia
None None None None None None
Thomas E. MacGil-
livary (representing 
STS)
Houston Methodist None None None None • Xylocor† None
S. Christopher 
Malaisrie  
(representing 
AATS)
Northwestern Uni-
versity
• Artivion
• Medtronic
• Edwards 
Life-
sciences‡
• Terumo
None • Artivion‡
• Atricure
• Edwards Lifesciences‡
• Terumo‡
• Artivion†
• Edwards 
Lifesciences†
• Medtronic†
None
Kathryn Osteen Baylor University 
Louise Herrington 
School of Nursing
None None None None • AHA*
• Congenital 
Heart Public 
Health Con-
sortium*
• Sigma Theta 
Tau-Eta 
Gamma 
Chapter*
• The Chil-
dren’s Heart 
Foundation*
None
Himanshu J. Patel University of Michi-
gan Health
• Edwards Life-
sciences
• Gore
• Medtronic‡
• Terumo
None None None • Edwards 
Lifesciences†
• Gore†
• Medtronic†
• Nexus†
None
Parag J. Patel 
(representing SIR)
Medical College of 
Wisconsin
None None None None • AHA*
• SIR*
None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025


e482
Isselbacher et al 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES December 13, 2022 Circulation. 2022;146:e334–e482. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106
Wanda M.  
Popescu (repre-
senting SCA)
Yale School of 
Medicine
None None None None • Ambu, Advi-
sory Board 
Member
None
Evelio Rodriguez Ascension Tennes 
see Saint Thomas 
Hospital
• Abbott‡
• Edwards Life-
sciences‡
• Abbott‡
• Edwards 
Life-
sciences‡
• Philips‡
None • Abbott
• Atricure
• Boston Scientific
• Claret
• Direct Flow
• Edwards Lifesciences‡
• Medtronic
• Abbott†
• Atricure†
• Boston Sci-
entific†
• Edwards 
Lifesciences†
• Medtronic†
None
Rebecca Sorber Johns Hopkins 
University School of 
Medicine
None None None None None None
Philip S. Tsao VA Palo Alto Health 
Care System; 
Stanford University 
School of Medicine
None None None None None None
Annabelle Santos 
Volgman
Rush College of 
Medicine
• Bristol Myers 
Squibb, 
DCICDP
• Janssen  
Pharmaceu-
ticals
• Merck
• Pfizer
• Sanofi‡
None None • NIH‡ • Apple*
• Novartis†
None
This table represents all reviewers’ relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be 
relevant to this document, at the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A 
person is deemed to have a significant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of 5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership 
of $5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the pre-
vious year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise 
noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/ 
relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*No financial benefit.
†This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that 
there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
‡Significant relationship.
AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, 
American Heart Association; DCICDP, Diverse Clinical Investigator Career Development Program; DSMB, data and safety monitoring board; NIH, National Institutes 
of Health; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIBIB, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering; PRC, Peer Review Committee; PI, 
principal investigator; SCA, Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; SIR, Society of Interventional Radiology; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; SVM, Society 
for Vascular Medicine; SVS, Society for Vascular Surgery; and VA, Veterans Affairs.
Appendix 2. Continued
Reviewer Employment Consultant
Speakers 
Bureau
Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research
Institutional, Or-
ganizational, or 
Other Financial 
Benefit
Expert  
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on May 8, 2025
