European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
Available online 24 June 2024
0953-6205/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of European Federation of Internal Medicine. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Practice Guidelines 
2024 European Society of Hypertension clinical practice guidelines for the management of 
arterial hypertension 
Endorsed by the European Federation of Internal Medicine (EFIM), European Renal Association (ERA), and International Society of 
Hypertension (ISH)  
1. Introduction 
The European Society of Hypertension (ESH) reported in 2023 its 
current Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension [ 1 ]. 
Following their aim to summarize the best available evidence for all 
aspects of hypertension management, the Task Force of the 2023 
Guidelines generated a comprehensive document covering almost 200 
pages including 1736 references [ 1 ]. This document thus provides a 
valuable and comprehensive source of information for hypertension 
management. However, due to the length of the text and its complexity, 
not only primary care providers (e.g. family physicians, general phys -
icians/internists), who represent the group of physicians that manages 
the vast majority of patients, but also specialists may find it challenging 
to navigate through the extensive guidelines with its numerous recom -
mendations. Therefore, the ESH decided to provide with its 2024 Clin -
ical Practice Guidelines a novel concise format that supports the 
dissemination of the most important information of the Guidelines for 
the management of the general hypertensive population and its imple -
mentation into clinical practice. To this end, the ESH developed a 
MASTER plan for the management of hypertension ( Fig. 1 ). For aspects 
that are (intentionally) not covered in this document and for the sup -
porting literature readers are referred to the full text of the 2023 ESH 
Guidelines [ 1 ]. 
2. Measure blood pressure – diagnose 
The accurate measurement of blood pressure (BP) is the cornerstone 
for the diagnosis and management of hypertension. The measurement of 
BP to diagnose hypertension therefore represents the first pivotal step of 
the ESH MASTER plan for the management of hypertension.  
• Conventional attended office BP measurement (OBPM) is the 
most well-studied method for assessing BP and the one by which the 
diagnosis of hypertension, BP classification, the role of BP as a car -
diovascular (CV) risk factor, the protective effect of antihypertensive 
treatment and the BP thresholds and targets of therapeutic in -
terventions have been established.  
• Ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) and home BP monitoring 
(HBPM) are important methods for out-of-office BP monitoring, that 
provide important additional information for the management of 
Abbreviations: ACEi, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor; ABPM, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; ADL, activity of daily living; AF, atrial fibrillation; 
ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; ARNI, angiotensin receptor neprylisin inhibitor; BB, beta blocker; BP, blood pressure; BMI, body mass index; bpm, beats per 
minute; BSA, body surface area; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; COPD, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease; COVID-19, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19); COX-2, cyclooxygenase 2; DASH, dietary approaches to stop hypertension; DBP, 
diastolic blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; ESH, European Society of Hypertension; FU, follow-up; HbA1c, he -
moglobin A
1c
; HBPM, home blood pressure monitoring; HDL, high density lipoprotein; HDP, hypertensive disorders in pregnancy; HF, heart failure; HFpEF, heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; HMOD, hypertension-mediated organ damage; ISH, isolated systolic 
hypertension; LDL, low density lipoprotein; Lp(a), lipoprotien (a); LV, left ventricle; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MMSE, mini mental state examination; MRA, 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NSAIDS, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; NsMRA, non-steroidal mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonist; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea; OBPM, office blood pressure monitoring; OTC, over the counter medications; PWV, pulse wave velocity; SCORE2, 
Systematic COronary Risk Evaluation model 2; SCORE2-OP, Systematic COronary Risk Evaluation model 2 for Older People; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SPC, single 
pill combination; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter type 2 inhibitors; TIA, transient ischemic attack; T/TL-diuretic, thiazide/thiazide-like diuretic; UACR, 
urinary albumin-creatinine ratio. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
European Journal of Internal Medicine 
journal homepage: www.elsevi er.com/loc ate/ejim 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2024.05.033 
Received 8 May 2024; Accepted 28 May 2024   

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
2
Fig. 1. The ESH MASTER plan for the management of hypertension.  
Fig. 2. Recommendations and use of the different methods for BP measurement.  
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
3
hypertensive patients. Important recommendations and details for 
the use of the different methods for BP measurement are summarized 
in Fig. 2 . 
Clinical indications that support the use of HBPM or ABPM are 
summarized in Table 1 . 
3. Assess patient 
A thorough patient work-up aims to gather essential information 
about the patient ’ s personal and medical history, any other relevant 
factors and co-morbidities that may impact their BP, CV risk and man -
agement. This information is critical in determining the initiation of the 
most appropriate treatment approach and the follow-up strategy. 
3.1. Basic assessment 
Due to the high prevalence of hypertension and thus the large 
number of individuals that will be managed by primary care providers, it 
is essential to prioritize the basic assessment to investigations that are 
effective and feasible in this setting, allowing widespread implementa -
tion. The recommended pathway shown in Fig. 3 should be adapted 
according to the severity of hypertension, clinical circumstances and 
individual needs of patients. 
The basic assessment includes personal and medical history, physical 
examination, lab tests and the recording of a 12-lead resting electro -
cardiogram (ECG) ( Fig. 3 ). The recommended evaluation allows the 
diagnosis and staging of chronic kidney disease (CKD), by assessing 
estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and urinary albumin- 
creatinine ratio (UACR), and of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) by 
ECG (although with limited sensitivity). 
An extended list of factors to be considered in the evaluation of pa -
tient ’ s history is shown in Table 2 . 
An extended list of factors that influence CV risk in patients with 
hypertension is shown in Table 3 . 
Further details for a comprehensive physical examination for pa -
tients with hypertension are summarized in Table 4 . 
The specific assessment of patients older than 80 years should 
include the analysis of their functional capacities/autonomy status as 
shown in Table 5 . 
Table 6 shows selected basic and extended laboratory tests for 
assessment of hypertensive patients 
3.2. Extended assessment 
The extended assessment of hypertension mediated organ damage 
(HMOD) can be executed as deemed necessary and available to physi -
cians ( Fig. 3 ). 
3.3. When to refer a patient 
Basic and extended assessment of patients should support decision 
making about when a patient should be referred to a hypertension 
specialist or a hospital (including the need for inpatient treatment). 
Criteria that influence these decisions are summarized in Fig. 3 . Addi -
tional information on the incidence of selected forms of secondary hy -
pertension according to age that can guide clinical decision making 
when to refer a patient with suspected secondary hypertension for 
further work-up is shown in Fig. 4 . 
4. Select therapy 
4.1. General aspects 
Lifestyle interventions have been shown to be effective in reducing 
BP in hypertensive patients and can also have additional benefits, such 
Table 1 
Clinical indications for home and ambulatory BP monitoring * .  
Conditions in which white-coat hypertension is more common, e.g. 
• Grade I hypertension on office BP measurement 
• Marked office BP elevation without HMOD 
Conditions in which masked hypertension is more common, e.g. 
• High-normal office BP 
• Normal office BP in individuals with HMOD or at high total CV risk 
In treated individuals 
• Confirmation of uncontrolled and true resistant hypertension 
• Evaluation of 24 h BP control (especially in high-risk patients) 
• Evaluating symptoms suggestive of hypotension (especially in older patients) 
Suspected postural or postprandial hypotension in treated patients 
Exaggerated BP response to exercise 
Considerable variability in office BP measurements 
Specific indications for ABPM rather than HBPM 
• Assessment of nocturnal BP and dipping status (e.g. sleep apnea, CKD, diabetes, endocrine hypertension, or autonomic dysfunction) 
• Patients incapable or unwilling to perform reliable HBPM, or anxious with self-measurement 
• Evaluation of patients considered for renal denervation  
• Children 
• Pregnancy 
Specific indications for HBPM rather than ABPM 
• Long-term follow-up of treated individuals to improve adherence with treatment and hypertension control 
• Patients unwilling to perform ABPM, or with considerable discomfort during the recording 
Indications for repeat out-of-office BP evaluation (same or alternative method – HBPM/ABPM) 
• Confirmation of white-coat hypertension or masked hypertension in untreated or treated individuals  
*
Using validated devices (see https://www.stridebp.org/ ). 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
4
Fig. 3. Recommended assessment as adapted according to the severity of hypertension, clinical circumstances and individual needs of patients.  
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
5
Table 2 
Medical and family history
a
.  
Personal history 
• Time of the first diagnosis of hypertension, including records of any previous medical screening, hospitalization 
• Stable or rapidly increasing BP 
• Recordings of current and past HBPM values  
• Current/past antihypertensive medications including their effectiveness and intolerance 
• Adherence to therapy 
• Previous hypertension in pregnancy/preeclampsia 
Risk factors
a 
• Family history of hypertension, CVD, stroke or kidney disease 
• Smoking history 
• Dietary history, alcohol consumption 
• High volume of sedentary behavior and lack of physical activity  
• Weight gain or loss in the past 
• History of erectile dysfunction 
• Sleep history, snoring, sleep apnea (information also from partner) 
• Stress 
• Long-term cancer survivor 
History, signs and symptoms of HMOD, CVD, stroke and kidney disease 
• Brain and eyes: headache, vertigo, syncope, impaired vision, TIA, sensory or motor deficit, stroke, carotid revascularization, cognitive impairment, memory loss, dementia (in older 
people) 
• Heart: chest pain, shortness of breath, edema, myocardial infarction, coronary revascularization, syncope, history of palpitations, arrhythmias (especially AF), heart failure 
• Kidney: thirst, polyuria, nocturia, hematuria, urinary tract infections 
• Peripheral arteries: cold extremities, intermittent claudication, pain-free walking distance, pain at rest, ulcer or necrosis, peripheral revascularization 
• Patient or family history of CKD (e.g. polycystic kidney disease) 
History of possible secondary hypertension 
• Young onset of grade 2 or 3 hypertension ( < 40 years), or sudden development of hypertension or rapidly worsening BP in older patients 
• History of repetitive renal/urinary tract disease 
• Repetitive episodes of sweating, headache, anxiety or palpitations, suggestive of pheochromocytoma 
• History of spontaneous or diuretic-provoked hypokalemia, episodes of muscle weakness and tetany (hyperaldosteronism) 
• Symptoms suggestive of thyroid disease or hyperparathyroidism 
• History of or current pregnancy, postmenopausal status and oral contraceptive use or hormonal substitution 
Drug treatments or use (other than antihypertensive drugs) 
• Recreational drug/substance abuse, concurrent therapies including nonprescription drugs, e.g. glucocorticoids, NSAIDs/COX-2 inhibitors, paracetamol (acetaminophen), 
immunosuppressive drugs, anticancer drugs, nasal decongestants  
a
Additional factors to be considered are listed in Table 3 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
6
Table 3 
Factors that influence CV risk in patients with hypertension.  
Parameter for risk stratification, which are included in SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP 
Sex (men > women) 
Age 
Level of SBP
a 
Smoking – current or past history 
Non-HDL cholesterol 
Established and suggested novel factors 
Family or parental history of early onset hypertension 
Personal history of malignant hypertension 
Family history of premature CVD (men aged < 55 years; women aged < 65 years) 
Heart rate (resting values > 80 bpm) 
Low birth weight 
Sedentary lifestyle 
Overweight or Obesity 
Diabetes 
Dyslipidemia 
Lp(a) 
Uric acid 
Adverse outcomes of pregnancy (recurrent pregnancy loss, preterm delivery, hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes) 
Early-onset menopause 
Frailty, functional capacities and autonomy status 
Psychosocial and socioeconomic factors 
Migration 
Environmental exposure to air pollution or noise 
Additional clinical conditions or comorbidities 
True resistant hypertension 
Sleep disorders (including OSA) 
COPD 
Gout 
Chronic inflammatory diseases 
Metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease 
Chronic infections (including long COVID-19) 
Migraine 
Depressive syndromes 
Erectile dysfunction 
Hypertension-mediated organ damage (HMOD) 
Increased large artery stiffness 
Pulse pressure (in older people) ≥ 60 mmHg 
Carotid – femoral PWV > 10 m/s in middle-aged people 
Presence of non-hemodynamically significant atheromatous plaque (stenosis) on imaging 
ECG LVH (Sokolow – Lyon index > 35 mm, or R in aVL ≥ 11 mm; Cornell voltage-duration product ( + 6 mm in women) > 2440 mm*ms, or Cornell voltage > 28 mm in men or > 20 mm 
in women) 
Echocardiographic LVH (LV mass index: men > 50 g/m
2.7
; women > 47 g/m
2.7 
( m = height in meters); indexation for BSA may be used in normal-weight patients: > 115 g/m
2 
in men 
and > 95/m
2 
in women 
Moderate increase of albuminuria 30 – 300 mg/24 h or elevated UACR (preferably in morning spot urine) 30 – 300 mg/g 
CKD stage 3 with eGFR 30 – 59 ml/min/1.73 m
2 
Ankle – brachial index < 0.9 
Advanced retinopathy: hemorrhages or exudates, papilledema 
Established cardiovascular and kidney disease 
Cerebrovascular disease: ischemic stroke, cerebral hemorrhage, TIA 
Coronary artery disease: myocardial infarction, angina, myocardial revascularization 
Presence of hemodynamically significant atheromatous plaque (stenosis) on imaging 
Heart failure 
Peripheral artery disease 
Atrial fibrillation 
Severe albuminuria > 300 mg/24 h or UACR (preferably in morning spot urine) > 300 mg/g 
CKD stage 4 and 5, eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73m
2  
a
DBP is not included in the SCORE2/SCORE2-OP tool to estimate CV risk. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
7
as increasing the efficacy of BP-lowering therapy, improving overall CV 
health and reducing the risk of other chronic diseases. They are 
important in the prevention of hypertension and may control BP when 
used alone already in a fraction of patients, i.e. in patient with mildly 
elevated grade 1 hypertension with systolic BP (SBP) and diastolic BP 
(DBP) < 150/95 mmHg and low CV risk. However, most patients with 
hypertension should be treated with a combination of both lifestyle in -
terventions and pharmacological treatment. The strategy for the initial 
management of hypertension with the aim to control BP within 3 
months according to the risk of patients is shown in Fig. 5 . 
The initial management as well as follow-up strategies should be 
executed according to the risk of patients as summarized in Fig. 6 . 
4.2. Lifestyle interventions 
The recommended lifestyle interventions together with their rele -
vance and prescribing patterns are shown in Fig. 7 . 
4.3. Pharmacological treatment 
The general treatment strategy for patients with hypertension is 
shown in Fig. 8 . The recommended major BP-lowering drug classes 
include angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), angiotensin 
receptor blockers (ARB), beta-blockers (BB), calcium channel blockers 
(CCB) and thiazide/thiazide-like diuretics (T/TL-diuretics). Additional 
therapies can be considered in patients with true resistant hypertension, 
heart failure and CKD as shown. Furthermore, renal denervation can be 
considered in true-resistant hypertension ( Fig. 8 ) and in patients who 
have uncontrolled BP despite the use of antihypertensive drug combi -
nation therapy, or if drug treatment elicits serious side effects and poor 
quality of life (if eGFR > 40 ml/min/1.73m
2
). 
The general strategy for pharmacological treatment shown in Fig. 8 
applies to a large number of patients including patients with diabetes, 
after a stroke or with peripheral artery disease. Further specific treat -
ment algorithms for true resistant hypertension and important co- 
morbidities including coronary heart disease, heart failure with pre -
served ejection fraction, atrial fibrillation, and CKD are shown in suppl. 
Figs. 1 – 5. 
The general BP treatment targets for office SBP and DBP are also 
shown in Fig. 8 along with additional comments that indicate the need to 
adjust these targets, e.g. in certain patient populations. 
The recommended strategy in older persons according to their 
functional capacities/autonomy status is summarized in Fig. 9 . 
5. Evaluate response 
It is important to evaluate the BP response after treatment initiation 
(3 months) as well as during short-term and long-term follow-up in 
patients with hypertension in order to monitor the effectiveness of the 
treatment and make any necessary adjustments. To aim first for BP 
control with SBP and DBP below 140 and 80 mmHg in most patients in 
the general hypertensive population and subsequently for optimal BP 
control achieving the individual BP targets is the important goal that 
should be evaluated ( Fig. 8 ). However, the evaluation of possible side 
effects (tolerability) and safety parameters, e.g. eGFR and serum po -
tassium levels, in response to treatment and changes in the risk factor 
Table 5 
Assessment of functional capacities/autonomy status in hypertensive patients 
older than 80 years.   
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 
Characteristics Fit Slowed but 
autonomous for 
most activities 
Severely 
dependent  
Diagnosis -ADL (Katz) ≥ 5 
and 
-absence of clinically 
significant dementia 
(MMSE > 20) 
and 
-routine walking 
activities 
-Profile between 
Groups 1 and 3 
-ADL (Katz): 
≤ 2 
or 
-severe 
dementia 
(MMSE 
≤ 10) 
or 
chronic 
bedridden 
or 
-end of life 
ADL: Activities of Daily Living (Katz Index) scaled rated from 0 (completely 
dependent) to 6 (completely autonomous). 
This scale comprises 6 ADL: Bathing, Dressing, Toileting, Transferring, Feeding 
and Continence. 
For each ADL ‘0 ′ means that the person is unable to do it without assistance, 0.5 
need of some assistance, 1 no need of any assistance. 
MMSE: Mini mental state examination. Score 0 – 30, 30 best, 0 – 10 severe de -
mentia, 11 – 20 moderate dementia, 21 – 30 absence of clinically significant de -
mentia. The assessment is used to guide treatment as shown in Fig. 9 . 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, 
Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of 
arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association 
(ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.10 
97/hjh.0000000000003480 ]. 
Table 4 
Comprehensive physical examination for hypertension
a
.  
Body habitus 
• Weight and height measured on a calibrated scale, with calculation of BMI 
• Waist circumference 
Signs of hypertension-mediated organ damage 
• Neurological examination and cognitive status 
• Fundoscopic examination for hypertensive retinopathy in emergencies 
• Auscultation of heart and carotid arteries 
• Palpation of carotid and peripheral arteries 
• Ankle – brachial index 
Signs of secondary hypertension 
• Skin inspection: cafe-au-lait patches of neurofibromatosis (pheochromocytoma) 
• Kidney palpation for signs of renal enlargement in polycystic kidney disease 
• Auscultation of heart and renal arteries for murmurs or bruits indicative of aortic coarctation, or renovascular hypertension 
• Signs of Cushing ’ s disease or acromegaly 
• Signs of thyroid disease  
a
Can be adapted according to the clinical circumstance. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
8
Table 6 
Selected standard laboratory tests for work-up of hypertensive patients
a
.  
Blood (serum/plasma) 
• Hemoglobin and/or hematocrit 
• Fasting blood glucose and HbA1c 
• Lipids: total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, triglycerides 
• Potassium and sodium 
• Uric acid 
• Creatinine (and/or cystatin C) for estimating GFR with eGFR formulas 
• Calcium 
Urine 
• Multicomponent dipstick test, UACR (preferably early morning spot urine), microscopic examination in selected patients  
a
Can be adapted according to the clinical circumstance. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Fig. 4. Incidence of selected forms of secondary hypertension according to age. 
Reproduced with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines 
for the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
9
Fig. 5. Strategy of the initial management of hypertension with the aim to control BP within 3 months according to the risk of patients. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
10
Fig. 6. Risk stratification according to grade and stage of hypertension. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874–2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
11
Fig. 7. Recommended lifestyle interventions together with their relevance and prescribing patterns.  
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
12
Fig. 8. The general treatment strategy for patients with hypertension. 
Adapted with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.: [Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 ESH Guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: Endorsed by the 
International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal Association (ERA). Journal of hypertension 2023; 41:1874 – 2071. https://doi.org/10.1097/hjh 
.0000000000003480 ]. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
13
Fig. 9. Recommended strategy in older persons according to their functional capacities/autonomy status.  
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
14
profile, HMOD or co-morbidities is also important. Fig. 10 summarizes 
important aspects that should be evaluated and considered during the 
initiation phase, short-term and long-term follow up. 
6. Conclusions 
The successful implementation of the guideline recommendations for 
the treatment of hypertension depends on many factors, including na -
tional/regional opportunities and challenges in healthcare systems. The 
ESH hopes that this MASTER plan will make a meaningful contribution 
to the further development and improvement of hypertension care. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The conflict of interest declaration of authors are compiled into one 
file that can be found on the ESH website: https://www.eshonline.or 
g/guidelines/2023-guidelines/ . ESH received no financial support for 
the generation of this guidelines. 
Acknowledgements 
We wish to sincerely thank Mandy Elgner (ESH coordinator) for her 
assistance, Joan Tycko (Certified Medical Illustrator) for excellent sup -
port in the preparation of the Figures of the MASTER plan and Medycyna 
Praktuczna Publishers for additional graphical support. 
Supplementary materials 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in 
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejim.2024.05.033 . 
Reference 
[1] Mancia G, Kreutz R, Brunstrom M, Burnier M, Grassi G, Januszewicz A, et al. 2023 
ESH Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension The Task Force for the 
management of arterial hypertension of the European Society of Hypertension: 
endorsed by the International Society of Hypertension (ISH) and the European Renal 
Association (ERA). J Hypertens 2023;41:1874 – 2071 . 
Fig. 10. Summary of important aspects that should be evaluated and considered during the initiation phase, short-term and long-term follow up.  
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

European Journal of Internal Medicine 126 (2024) 1–15
15
Reinhold Kreutz
a , 1 , *
, Mattias Brunstr ¨om
b
, Michel Burnier
c
, 
Guido Grassi
d
, Andrzej Januszewicz
e
, Maria Lorenza Muiesan
f
, 
Konstantinos Tsioufis
g
, Rosa Maria de Pinho
h
, Fabio Lucio Albini
i , j
, 
Jean-Marc Boivin
k , l
, Michalis Doumas
m
, J ´anos Nemcsik
n
, 
Enrique Rodilla
o
, Enrico Agabiti-Rosei
p
, Engi Abd Elhady Algharably
a
, 
Giancarlo Agnelli
q
, Athanase Benetos
r
, Jana Brguljan Hitij
s
, 
Renata Cífkov ´a
t , u
, V ´eronique Cornelissen
v
, A.H. Jan Danser
w
, 
Christian Delles
x
, Ricardo G ´omez Huelgas
y , z
, Zolt ´an J ´arai
aa
, 
Paolo Palatini
ab
, Atul Pathak
ac
, Alexandre Persu
ad
, Jorge Polonia
ae
, 
Pantelis Sarafidis
af
, George Stergiou
ag
, Costas Thomopoulos
ah
, 
Christoph Wanner
ai
, Thomas Weber
aj
, Bryan Williams
ak
, Sverre 
E. Kjeldsen
al
, Giuseppe Mancia
am , 1 
a
Charit ´e – Universit ¨atsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universit ¨at 
Berlin and Humboldt-Universit ¨at zu Berlin, Institute of Clinical 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Berlin, Germany 
b
Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden 
c
Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland 
d
Clinica Medica, University Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy 
e
Department of Hypertension, National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, 
Poland 
f
UOC 2 Medicina, ASST Spedali Civili di Brescia, Department of Clinical 
and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy 
g
First Department of Cardiology, Medical School, University of Athens, 
Hippokration Hospital, Athens, Greece 
h
General and Family Doctor, ULS Entre Douro e Vouga, S ˜ao Jo ˜ao da 
Madeira, Portugal 
i
Centro Ipertensione e Protezione Cardiovascolare, Milano-Nord, Italy 
j
ATS-Milano Citt `a Metropolitana, Milan, Italy 
k
Department of Family Medicine, Lorraine University, Nancy, France 
l
ESH Hypertension Excellence Center Coordinator, Nancy, France 
m
2nd Prop Department of Internal Medicine, Aristotle University, 
Thessaloniki, Greece 
n
Department of Family Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, 
Hungary 
o
Hypertension Unit, Hospital de Sagunto, Universidad Cardenal Herrera- 
CEU, CEU Universities, Valencia, Spain 
p
Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, 
Italy 
q
Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri, IRCCS, University of Perugia, Perugia, 
Italy 
r
Department of Geriatric Medicine and INSERM DCAC, CHRU-Nancy, 
Universit ´e de Lorraine, Nancy, France 
s
Department of Hypertension, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Medical 
University Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia 
t
Center for Cardiovascular Prevention, Charles University in Prague, First 
Faculty of Medicine and Thomayer University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic 
u
Department of Medicine II, Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic 
v
Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium 
w
Division of Pharmacology and Vascular Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands 
x
School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK 
y
Clinical Management Unit of Internal Medicine, Hospital Regional 
Universitario de M ´alaga, Instituto de Investigaci ´on Biom ´edica de M ´alaga, 
University of M ´alaga, M ´alaga, Spain 
z
CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la Nutrici ´on, Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Madrid, Spain 
aa
South-Buda Center Hospital St. Imre University Hospital, Budapest & 
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 
ab
Studium Patavinum, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, 
Padova, Italy 
ac
Princess Grace Hospital Monaco (Centre Hospitalier Princesse Grace, 
CHPG), Monaco 
ad
Division of Cardiology, Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Cliniques 
Universitaires Saint-Luc and Pole of Cardiovascular Research, Institut de 
Recherche Exp ´erimentale et Clinique, Universit ´e Catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium 
ae
Faculty of Medicine of Porto, CINTESIS, Portugal 
af
1st Department of Nephrology, Hippokration Hospital, Aristotle University 
of Thessaloniki, Greece 
ag
Hypertension Center STRIDE-7, School of Medicine, Third Department of 
Medicine, Sotiria Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 
Athens, Greece 
ah
Department of Cardiology, General Hospital of Athens “ Laiko ” , Greece 
ai
Division of Nephrology, Wuerzburg University Clinic, Wuerzburg, 
Germany 
aj
Cardiology Department, Klinikum Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria 
ak
Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University College London (UCL), 
National Institute for Health Research UCL Hospitals Biomedical Research 
Centre, London, UK 
al
Departments of Cardiology and Nephrology, Institute for Clinical 
Medicine, and Ullevål Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 
am
University of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy 
*
Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: reinhold.kreutz@charite.de (R. Kreutz). 
1
Chairpersons of the Guidelines. 
Practice Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                              